Hypersynchronism.com is an alt-hypertext search engine. Character by character, the user types a string. The site finds matching characters in a corpus of texts. Visitors can only type characters matching existing strings. So, as the input grows, the letters slowly dis(and re)appear, until you’re left with a series of letters matching only one chunk of writing. That entry is hyperlinked to the original piece. The searcher and the result co-create the output. This is a project I made while in grad school at MIT, where, outside my department, is the most rational, frictionless, and “design thinking” forward place I’ve ever experienced. I’m realizing that may not be the best way to engage with the world. Mystery and weirdness are valuable. This is not a publication. Think of it as a very inefficient, curated, opt-in search engine. Basically, nothing the tech world likes. Rather than a gimmick, I think a structure like this is a special way of searching how we read, prioritizing discovery over results, with the searcher and writer co-creating the world. Guided by a set of parameters, the user writes what they were looking for. The author is dead via search engine.

Featured writers include Adina Glickstein, Laurel Schwulst, Molly Soda, Maya Man, Ruby Justice Thelot, Sarah Chekfa, Elan Kinderman Ullendorff, Arianna Caserta, Cora Lewis, Avocado Ibuprofen, Chia Amisola, Angela Qian, Greta Rainbow, Iman Husain, Lucas Gelfond, Sam Lavigne, Tega Brain, Elie Andersen, Trey Heller, Mindy Seu, Michelle Santiago Cortés, Hugh Francis, Lucia Kan Sperling, Isabella Haid, and Irene Bakola. They all generously agreed to share their texts for the project.
In July 2025, a computer program called GPUHammer was able to flip bits on Nvidia chips, decreasing an AI model’s accuracy from 80% to less than 1%. A long term patch was quickly implemented. The fix introduced up to a 10% slowdown and reduced memory capacity by 6.25%. The company’s 4.6 trillion valuation was unaffected, continuing to climb in spite of the vulnerability.

In January 2024, a similar security vulnerability in Apple’s GPUs was discovered, this time prompting serious privacy concerns. Again, the stock price went unaffected, and the news coverage was relatively minimal.

Greco-Roman curse tablets are artifacts from a centuries-long practice of inscribing a plea (often on a piece of metal) to a higher power to deliver justice. Interested in words of power, the functionalization of language by technology, and hacker culture, I imagined the curse tablet for the digital age, printing the actual viruses on steel using similar laser methods to chip manufacturing. Smaller than any human could write, but still readable. The code is placed in a pattern that mimics the physical headquarters of these companies, as seen from above.

They are not captured well in code. Watch the videos here (Nvidia, Apple).
Image Identity is a short video essay about my experience making an art piece that entailed auto-downloading every image I saw online over the course of a week, questioning the value, feeling, and reality of being identified with the content we consume online.
Image Transfer is an art piece where a digital photo gets volleyed back and forth between two computers. Challenging the functional mandate of the hardware of the device being as frictionless as possible, the piece experimented with breaking down and transferring data through novel interfaces. I zoomed in on the sensory artifacts of the screen, bringing to light the mediating quality of the digital devices. Considering the material intervention of both the webcam and the screen, a photo was passed from computer to computer, pixel by pixel, lighting the room up with each flash. Inevitably, the image tints blue and the detail is lost as it’s reconstructed, the screen winning out over the pure data it seeks to channel.

Video here.


In YouTube Collage, I continued my exploration of divination, meaning-making from randomness and web-scraping, by writing a program that collages YouTube videos with low (generally under 20) views. The videos are completely random. I made no curatorial choices. By layering these videos on top of each other, soupy fragments of tenderness and humanity poke through. A sense of experience. Of lived lives. Of an aura being fed to an unfeeling machine. Below are a few outputs from the program.

Watch some outputs here, here, and here. Code here.



Associative Scroll (link here)—inspired by the class I taught at the School for Poetic Computation and an essay I wrote for the Are.na Annual—creates a programmatic collage of images. Each image is sourced from Wikipedia. Beginning with a random page, the program clicks through linked pages, adding an image for each page. In this way, each image is linked to the last. Each refresh presents a new collection.

CAM SALE (video here) fetches random images live-sourced from the Flickr API, and the viewer is presented with a choice between two. The chosen one is sent to a remote receipt printer, which is continually live-streamed to a second screen. This piece was born out of an interest in exploring the uncanny knowledge that modern media consumption is inescapably a flat, transactional act. When you remove the engaging element and incentive for advertisement on digital platforms, what’s the purpose? Is this consumption fulfilling, or is it just an organizational pursuit, like filling out a spreadsheet?

We dump our cultural output into binary buckets: good/bad, ugly/pretty, valuable/worthless. Liking, swiping, and sorting algorithms further data-point-ify and codify our taste while obscuring the mundanity with clever psychological tricks. By appropriating recognizable consumptive and transactive symbols while keeping them at a remove, CAM SALE looks at the alienation that capitalist image culture creates. Rather than an infinite scroll, the viewer is repeatedly, directly confronted with more content: a less engaging, never-ending wasteland. Their choices are physicalized on a POS system, a reminder of the tangible impacts our digital life creates (which I wrote about for Document Journal and Cursor).
Infinite Entertainment Value (video here) is a 3D browser environment that streams the current four most viewed Twitch channels on the backdrop of an (intentionally already generated, not by me) AI image of a meadow. Generatively inexhaustible and always flowing, it questions just how pleasurable infinite wells of content, data, and computation can be.

As AI (and our culture's computational ethos, writ large) destroys our environment, we distract ourselves with unfulfilling artificial environments.
Digital Divination is browser-based poetry work designed to look like a vintage computer terminal. An AI trained on Allison Parrish's Gutenberg poetry corpus—generates a line of poetry, which is then sent through Google Image API to collect a random image(s) deemed related by the algorithm.

Click the screen to show a new line and layer another image. The piece was inspired by I Ching's The Book of Changes, Tan Lin's ambient poetics, and Instagram screenshot chainmail of the early 2010s. The project is interested in excavating the public—digital—unconscious. This is the first of many experiments with this broad goal. Coded and designed using JavaScript, HTML, and CSS. To save computing power, my money, and the environment, I have terminated the ability to generate any new lines, instead recycling already generated lines.
In Still Bodies, the user is an object, simultaneously inert (in their decision making) and active (in the fine motor skills of the hand that engages with the interface). In my own work, this has manifested in personifying inert and stable materials and subjecting them to the immaterial, digital data. I cast small statues—digitally modeled, with hard, right angles—out of concrete and overlaid them with blurry, projected, mundane smartphone videos. Diffuse edges, vibrant colors, and eye-catching vague movements are layered on the static subject of the figurine. The humanoids become a canvas for the uninterpretable (but eye-catching) digital landscape.

Video here.
