Will Allstetter
Synchronization of Senses Midterm, 10/19

The modern interface is a matte smooth material. The surface is not slippery or rough, but completely devoid of texture at all. From the hardware (minuscule diodes emitting pure intangible light through a glass barrier meant to disappear) to the software (abstracted, purely symbolic, non-emotive language hidden from the user) to design (rounded, unnaturally vibrant, and purely representational), the digital environment appears a step outside the physical world.
It’s an alien space to enter, a visual environment predicated solely on symbolism, more so than any tether to reality. I have never seen anything in the physical world that resembles the rounded, multicolored, static, and flat Instagram logo. The remove is more than solely aesthetic. Practically, the end user is separated by a minimum of eight levels of abstraction (screen, written code, assembly language, machine language, binary, electrical pulses, logic gates, transistors) from the machine’s physical reality. For most, anything beyond the first level is illegible. A select few are able to parse the second. Dramatically fewer move beyond that. No human can “read” the electrical pulses, still two levels away from the device’s operation.
So, we, the general public, the users, are left with an interface. Insofar as interfaces are designed, they are designed to do something. Functional (input -> calculation -> output) through and through, there is no errant path to take. In the rare event that an unaccounted-for input is selected, the device will more than likely crash, as it is not programmed to handle it. The system is hostile to idling, created only to churn through data processing. It would not make sense to rest, passively enjoying the digital surroundings in the same way one might sit on a park bench, taking in the sensory ambiance.
That then may provide some hint into why the screen manifests so otherworldly and immaterial. The experience is not primarily born out of an aesthetic, sensory, or even a symbolic structure, but as a representation of functional computation. The interface is a visual manifestation of abstracted, pure process. This is the exact opposite of what Deleuze and Guattari describe of art in What Is Philosophy?, where the medium preserves and captures a “bloc of sensation” (164). As Alexander Galloway puts it in The Interface Effect, “the more a dioptric device erases the traces of its own functioning (in actually delivering the thing represented beyond, the more it succeeds in its functional mandate)” (25). 
Challenging the functional mandate of erasure, my piece to the right experimented with breaking down and transferring data through novel interfaces. I zoomed in on the sensory artifacts of the screen, bringing to light the mediating quality of the digital devices. Considering the material intervention of both the webcam and the screen, a photo was passed from computer to computer, pixel by pixel, lighting the room up with each flash. Inevitably, the image tints blue and the detail is lost as it’s reconstructed, the screen winning out over the pure data it seeks to channel.
Despite its limitations, as a very (and still increasingly) profitable space, designers have been tasked with a strong incentive to manufacture a desire to offload all facets of life to the computer, hoping to coax their users to spend more and more time plugged in. Clever dopamine hacks have driven Gen Z to spend twelve hours a day looking at a screen (Wolf, 112). Shiny graphics, eye-catching animations, and gamified rewards are pummeled into the user. The social detriments of this design incentive have been examined and decried ad nauseam. Tristan Harris sums up the exploitation of desire via biology nicely as “the race to the bottom of the brain stem” (Bridle). What has been given less attention, however, is the way desire itself, as a phenomenon and sensation, has morphed. Born on the aforementioned immaterial smooth plane, how does the desire that inspires scrolling, tapping, and clicking feel? 
Rather than a burning sexual urge or aching hunger, a “doomscroll” feels like inertia. There is always another button asking to be tapped, and I, at the behest of the interface, oblige. In The Agony of Eros, Byung-Chul Han dubs modern Western society as a “you can” culture, as opposed to a “you should” culture: “You can produces massive compulsion, on which the achievement-subject dashes him- or herself to pieces… Auto-compulsion proves more fatal than allo-compulsion, because there is no way to resist oneself” (10). This orientation makes sense as the mode for the digital age. The interface creates a set of possible actions, providing (only) functional options for its user.
The user is an object, simultaneously inert (in their decision making) and active (in the fine motor skills of the hand that engages with the interface). In my own work, this has manifested in personifying inert and stable materials and subjecting them to the immaterial, digital data. I cast small statues—digitally modeled, with hard, right angles—out of concrete and overlaid them with blurry, projected, mundane smartphone videos. Diffuse edges, vibrant colors, and eye-catching vague movements are layered on the static subject of the figurine. The humanoids become a canvas for the uninterpretable (but eye-catching) digital landscape.
The computer, however, does not only ask for inputs. It computes and transforms them to create outputs. Data points for advertisers are one obvious result. However, under the logic of in/out, what does the user receive? As currently designed, dopamine (Wolf, 110). Han later identifies a similar force in culture, naming it “the dictate of positivity, which transforms everything into a formula for enjoyment and consumption” (14). Yet pleasure and desire are not easily reducible to their computable, calculatable, and chemical components. As Deleuze and Guattari conclude in What is Philosophy:
The search for sensation is fruitless if we go no farther than reactions and the excitations that they prolong, as Leibniz said, does nothing, or does not act, but is only present; it preserves. Contraction is not an action but a pure passion, a contemplation that preserves the before in the after. Sensation, then, is on a plane that is different from mechanisms, dynamisms, and finalities: it is on a plane of composition where sensation is formed by contracting that which composes it, and by composing itself with other sensations that contract it in turn. Sensation is pure contemplation, for it is through contemplation that one contracts, contemplating oneself to the extent that one contemplates the elements from which one originates. Contemplating is creating, the mystery of passive creation, sensation. Sensation fills out the plane of composition and is filled with itself by filling itself with what it contemplates: it is "enjoyment" and “self-enjoyment.” (211-12)


An auto-compulsive mandate of positivity is dangerous.  Deleuze and Guattari’s enjoyment of “passive creation” finds no home in the context of an always-working system. Missing preservation, the smooth cyclical nature of the interface (input/output, forever), keeps the user falling towards a ground that perpetually recedes away. As purely functional sensation (i.e., not really sensation at all), the screen binge manifests in a dull pressure behind the eyes and a void in the senses. 
Later, the philosophical duo refers to knowledge (a good corollary for the use-value created by the machine) as a “function.” To them, this function “is not a matter of contracting cases or moments in a single contemplation but one of establishing a necessary relation between factors that remain independent” (215). This is in contrast to their theories of sensation quoted earlier. Yet, the interface conflates the two. Sensation is functionalized, and knowledge is extracted. In The Film Sense, Sergei Eisenstein stresses the importance of synchronization of senses in a coherent aesthetic experience, noting “the arts, fused together, correspond to the very image of an epoch and the image of the reasoning process of those who are linked to the epoch” (100). Triangulating the three thinkers, the digital interface emerges as a purely functionalized aesthetic, where history, the context, and meaning—the “image of an epoch and the image of the reasoning process”—are absent. Engrossed fully in the small rectangle, everything to the periphery fades away. The task at hand is the only reality. Once completed, it is ready to be forgotten, the utility extracted, and another button presented to be clicked. An imaginary future, feeling, or idea does not exist, as it is not “useful.” Instead, a closed chemical loop mechanically extracts proto-sensations from the user on which to perform calculations.
This is all very bleak. Passive time, human experience, and art, when digitalized, appear as resources to be extracted. Yet, Deleuze and Guattari make an odd and fruitful side note near the end of What is Philosophy?: “Of course, plants and rocks do not possess a nervous system. But, if nerve connections and cerebral integrations presuppose a brain-force as faculty of feeling coexistent with the tissues, it is reasonable to suppose also a faculty of feeling that coexists with embryonic tissues and that appears in the Species as a collective brain; or with the vegetal tissues in the ‘small species’” (212). Throughout the text, they locate open experience not just as existing in the mind, but as a more diffuse process across a network. With this specific aside, however, they open that sensory process to any network. Naturally, networked computational devices come to mind.
Is it possible to create generative, sensory networks within the technology? Interested, I first turned to language as an avenue for exploring the question. Through code, text is central to the operation of computation. It also exists as a technology itself. William Wiebe sums it up nicely:
Text can do more things than ever before, yet those things no longer correspond to the historical structure of literary culture and its operating system of narrative time… Text today circulates predominantly as a mode of technical coordination—between servers, sensors, models, platforms, and users—with machine-generated outputs synchronizing behaviors across computational systems. This is an epochal shift in the function of language: algorithmic processing substitutes for human understanding, logical operations for reading… [There is] a broader cultural restructuring of language from a mode of introspection and historical reasoning into a behavioral interface. Whereas the twentieth century identified language with desire and repression, the twenty first wires it to neural networks and user data.

The structure of digital-first text is parceled rather than read, no longer developing, but exploding in every direction and dense packets of information. Returning to Deleuze, Guattari, and Eisenstein, the text loses its synchronization in the mind, becoming another flat interface for “reactions and the excitations” (Deleuze and Guattari, 211). I see language’s inherent beauty in the knowledge of a gap between referent and reference, reaching out and attempting to describe an ineffiable reality. As Anne Carson explores in Eros the Bittersweet, desire—what the interface seeks to stimulate—is activated by distance, and text encapsulates it’s geometry: “When I contemplate the physical spaces that articulate the letters ‘I love you’ in a written text, I may be led to think about other spaces, for example the space that lies between ‘you’ in the text and you in my life. Both of these kinds of space come into being by an act of symbolization. Both require the mind to reach out from what is present and actual to something else, something glimpsed in the imagination” (Carson, 78). The digital has no distance, no breaks. Nothing is incomputable. Even “whitespace” is syntactically meaningful—or overlooked—in code.
In an era of LLMs (and even search engines) flatly appropriating text, I attempted to create a piece that reintegrates writing, reading, and searching into a branching network.  Character by character, the user types a string of words. Behind the scenes, the site finds matching characters in a larger corpus of texts. Users can only type characters that would match an existing string in the database. As a result, as the string grows, the letters slowly dis(and sometimes re)appear, until you're left with a series of letters only matching one original text. That final entry is hyperlinked to the original piece. There’s a built-in friction the traditional interface is allergic to. It is not seamless or circular. The constraints are evident. The network of nodes is creative; a nervous system like the one referenced by Deleuze and Guattari. Yet, admittedly, it is still a function—somewhat. The input is the output, collapsing that dichotomy, but a URL is still generated. The interface still presents barriers: the program is still asked to do something. 
Inspired by Carson, I moved on, looking at how ancient people utilized, first encountered, and were influenced by the technology of written language for insights into the ongoing digital textual paradigm shift. This led me to Greco-Roman Curse tablets: a centuries-long practice of inscribing a plea (often on a piece of metal) to a higher power to deliver justice to another person, oftentimes whose identity was unknown (Woolf). The first records of the tablets are dated to the 6th century BCE, a period when the “phenomenon of alphabetization and the beginning of the spread of literacy throughout Greek society was perhaps the most dramatic” (Carson, 67). Born at a time when the everyday person began to encounter the written word, the tablets mirror the creators pushing up against the technical affordances of language, which gives special consideration to “space and the distances between things” (Carson, 74). After inscription, they were commonly written, thrown, and physically separated from the creator. Written in the first person, targeting a mystery identity, like text, it naively reaches outside the bounds of the self to an unknown other. A textual mode, through and through. What, then, would a digital curse tablet look like? I made (and am in the process of making) a few. What felt powerful about the Greco-Roman tablets was the harnessing of textual technological power they represented for their creators.
Thinking back to Wiebe’s idea of language becoming a tool for “technical coordination,” unlike the antiques, I reframed the curses not to gulf any distance, but as powerful functions, specifically writing out computer viruses. I chose the viruses (GPU Hammer and LeftoverLocals) that exploit physical attacks on the hardware. The power lives in the text, with GPUHammer’s lines of code able to demolish the functionality of Nvidia’s—a $4.5 trillion dollar company leading the AI revolution—primary product. I kept the pieces metal, a reference to the physical, metal underpinnings of computers. Born material, the far-off, invisible computational world is still subject to the laws of nature. Both physical and inhuman, I inscribed the markings impossibly small for a human, but still readable. Closer inspection shows it to be assembly and machine code illegible to humans, an uncanny appropriation of human glyphs by the computer. My most recent (left) mimics the contours of the buildings and paths at Apple’s headquarters. I was drawn to the physical paths and avenues of information that existed in this citadel of information. Almost an interface in itself, the building’s construction as a perfect circle/wall seemed uncannily symbolic, artificially separating the interior from the exterior (software/hardware) in a perfect, functional loop. It’s here that the feeling of digital desire is attempted to be architected.
Crucially, the act of inscription is in direct opposition to the ahistoricity of the interface, which drops non-functional context (read: all context). At their core, the concrete figures, image transfer protocol, and hypertext website all attempt to place the act of computation in a contextual lineage, whether it be material, cultural, or historical. The interface’s fabricated, chemical experience is not sensation.  For Carson and Han, eros is found in the (oftentimes painful) complexity. For Deleuze and Guattari, this is sensation’s crucial act of “preservation” (164). For Eisenstein, this is synchronization.
Works Cited
Allstetter, Will. "~some vague feeling~." In Are.na Annual Vol. 6: Document, edited by Megan Miller and Michelle Santiago Cortés, 65-72. New York, NY: Are.na Editorial, December 5, 2024.
Bridle, James, “Phenological Mismatch,” e-flux, June 2019, e-flux.com/architecture/becoming-digital/273079/phenological-mismatch.
Carson, Anne. Eros the Bittersweet. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Chris (Shaopeng) Lin, Joyce Qu, and Gururaj Saileshwar, “GPUHammer: Rowhammer Attacks on GPU Memories are Practical,” USENIX Security 2025, (August 2025): gpuhammer.com/. 
Eisenstein, Sergei. The Film Sense. Translated by Jay Leyda. New York, NY: Meridian Books, 1957.
Galloway, Alexander. The Interface Effect. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2012.
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari. What is Philosophy? Translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell. New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1994.
Han, Byung-Chul. "Being Able Not To Be Able," The Agony of Eros. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.
Wiebe, William. “Optimal Brain Damage,” e-flux, September 24, 2025, https://www.e-flux.com/notes/6783397/optimal-brain-damage.
Wolf, Maryanne. Reader, Come Home. New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2018.
Woolf, Greg. “Curse Tablets: The History of a Technology.” Greece and Rome 69, no. 1 (2022): 120–34. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0017383521000267.
