Interface
Criticism
Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
aarhus university press
edited by christian ulrik andersen  
& søren bro pold
Christian Ulrik Andersen, associate professor,  
Aarhus University. Research interests include  
game interfaces and textual interaction in relation  
to the public sphere.
Søren Bro Pold, associate professor, Aarhus  
Univer sity. Research interests are interface  
aesthetics and criticism in electronic literature,  
net art, software art and digital culture.
Christian Ulrik Andersen
Inke Arns
Dragana Antic & Matthew Fuller
Morten Breinbjerg
Christoph Bruno
Geoff Cox
Florian Cramer
Lone Koefoed Hansen
Erkki Huhtamo
Jakob Lillemose
Henrik Kaare Nielsen
Søren Bro Pold
Bodil Marie Stavning Thomsen
Edited by Christian Ulrik Andersen & Søren Bro Pold
Interface Criticism 
Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
From the screen of our laptops, and from the ubiquitous  
portable devices, smart phones, and media players, to the  
embedded computation in clothes, architecture and big urban 
screens, interfaces are everywhere. They are simultaneously 
demanding our attention and computing quietly in the  
background, turning action into inter-action, and mediating 
our experience of and relations to the social and environ-
mental. But how can aesthetics respond to this, and how  
do interfaces set the scene for artistic practices?
Interface Criticism is not another design manual but a critical 
investigation for readers interested in the aesthetic, cultural 
and political dimensions of interfaces. With contributions 
from leading researchers within the field, the book covers a 
wide range of aesthetic expressions – including urban screens, 
wearable interfaces, performances, games, net-art, software 
art, and sound art, and discusses how new cultures evolve 
around, for example, open source or live coding. 
The volume critically
 investigates the aesthetics of inter-
faces in ways that transcend the iconic surface of the graphical 
user interface and goes beyond the buttons. Ultimately  
the book develops interface aesthetics as an appropriate  
paradigm for a critical discussion of the computer.
isbn 9788779345041
Interface Criticism 
Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
Edited by 
Andersen 
& Pold
ISBN978-87-793-4504-1
9788779 345041
83731_om_interface_.indd   1 12/22/10   9:23:00 AM

Interface Criticism

Interface
Criticism
Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
aarhus university press
edited by christian ulrik andersen 
& søren bro pold

Interface Criticism
Acta Jutlandica. Humanities Series 2011/1
© The authors and Aarhus University Press 2011
Cover design: Carl-H.K. Zakrisson, Polytype
Cover illustration: Alexei Shulgin
Design: Carl-H.K. Zakrisson, Polytype
issn 0065-1354 (Acta Jutlandica)
issn 0901-0556 (Humanities Series 1)
isbn 9788771242393
Aarhus University Press
Aarhus
Langelandsgade 177
8200 Aarhus N
Copenhagen
Tuborgvej 164
2400 Copenhagen NV
www.unipress.dk
Fax 89 42 53 80
International distributors: 
Gazelle Book Services Ltd.
White Cross Mills
Hightown, Lancaster, LA1 4XS
United Kingdom
www.gazellebookservices.co.uk
The David Brown Book Company
Box 511
Oakville, CT 06779
USA
www.oxbowbooks.com
Published with the financial support of 
The Aarhus University Research Foundation
Novo Nordisk Fonden
Research supported by
The Danish Council for Independent Research, Humanities 
Center for Digital Urban Living (The Danish Council for  
Strategic Research, KINO, grant number 2128-07-0011)
Digital Aesthetics Research Center


introduction : Interface Criticism 7
back:  Displays and History
erkki huhtamo   
Monumental Attractions: Toward An Archaeology  
of Public Media Interfaces 21
bodil marie stavning thomsen   
The Haptic Interface: On Signal Transmissions and Events 43
 
through:  Sensation and Perception
lone koefoed hansen   
The Interface at the Skin 63
søren bro pold   
Interface Perception: The Cybernetic Mentality and  
Its Critics: Ubermorgen.com 91
 
behind:  Representation and Computation
florian cramer   
What Is Interface Aesthetics,  
or What Could It Be (Not)?  117
dragana antic and matthew fuller  
The Computation of Space 130
 
down:  Software and Code
geoff cox  Means-end of Software 145
morten breinbjerg  
Poesis of Human-Computer Interaction: Music, Materiality  
and Live Coding 162
christian ulrik andersen  Writerly Gaming: Political Gaming 178
out:  Culture and Politics
henrik kaare nielsen  
The Net Interface and the Public Sphere 203
jacob lillemose  Is There Really Only One Word For It?  
Software Vocabularies in the Expanded Field of Interface Aesthetics  223
inke arns  Transparent World: Minoritarian  
Tactics in the Age of Transparency 253
christophe bruno  Collective Hallucination and Capitalism 2.0:  
Scale-free Elections in France 279
About the Authors 293
19
61
115
143
201
277

Interface Criticism
Aesthetics Beyond Buttons*
by christian ulrik andersen  
& søren bro pold
The human computer interface has been a growing part of our cul-
ture for decades. First came the early experiments with computer 
graphics and games in the 1960s, then the commercial introduction 
of graphical user interfaces in the mid-1980s, and today computer 
interfaces take a myriad forms and are constantly met both at work 
 and in our private lives. Wherever we go, we find physical interfaces 
such as the mouse, keyboards, controllers, touch screens, micro -
phones and cameras; we see visual interfaces such as desktop meta-
phors and computer game worlds; we hear audible interfaces such 
as sounds signalling the state of a machine, the start-up of an oper-
ating system, an incoming text message, or more sophisticated audio 
-interfaces as in audio based games and sound art. The range of inter
faces is expanding to meet the needs of different technologies, uses, 
cultures and contexts: mobile, networked, ubiquitous or embedded 
in the environment and architecture. Some interfaces may even  
be designed to be invisible and imperceptible such as those used in 
surveillance and tracking technologies. No matter how or where, the 
interface is a dominant cultural form providing a way to mediate  
between humans and machines and between culture and data,  
affecting the way we perceive cultural activities and perform them 
in public and private. 
Interfaces are designed with specific purposes, some very narrow 
and technically determined as technical protocols, others more  
application and end user oriented such as interfaces for reading, see-
ing, listening, communication and experience. Until recently, it  
has been common practice to discuss interfaces primarily from an 
* Thanks to Claire Neesham for language correction.

engineering perspective, as something that should be optimised to 
offer seamless functionality. This approach has led to the ‘what-you-
see-is-what-you-get’-text editors and the emphasis on user-friendly 
and transparent design. The main idea is that the computer should 
blend smoothly into our homes and environments as something we 
do not have to deal with consciously. 
Simultaneous with the development of the interface, and often in 
a critical dialogue with this, a digital aesthetics has developed. Even 
as early as the 1960s, different digital art forms and early computer 
games were starting to explore the emerging formal languages and 
new aesthetics of the computer in which it was designed to be expe-
rienced; therefore transparency and seamless functionality were  
not the goal. For many years this meant an apparent antagonism be-
tween digital art and interface design. As interface design becomes 
more diverse, however, it affects cultural practices in new ways, and 
the antagonism between art and design is thus beginning to dissolve 
with current developments in design and technology. Business com-
munication has discovered experience oriented design, and comput-
ers, smart phones and gadgets are prime fashion objects and cultur-
ally coded. Furthermore, in the reign of Web 2.0, the economy of  
interfaces is changing from a traditional production mode based on 
employed software developers to being more network oriented and 
user driven (with the side effect of providing free labour) while still 
restricting and containing their work. Simultaneously, programmers 
are becoming culturally and politically aware and engage in the free 
software movement. Even certain forms of digital art are starting  
to enter the mainstream both commercially and institutionally. This 
development calls for a new discussion of the role of digital art and 
aesthetics within an interface culture where art is increasingly inter-
mingling – though not coinciding – with design.
This book aims to offer a much needed perspective on the role  
of artistic practices and aesthetic theory within interface culture.  
As editors of the book, we see interface criticism as an appropriate 
paradigm for a critical discussion of the computer and how it relates 
to art and culture today. In the contributions to the book we find  
a discussion of both developments: how interfaces are related to cul-
ture, and how art has developed around interfaces, often under -
Interface Criticism – Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
8

mining common conceptions of the interface. But, before we begin 
our discussion, we need to define interface and describe what we 
mean by interface criticism as aesthetics beyond buttons.
Our conception of the interface is not restricted to the well-known 
graphical user interface between humans and computers, e.g. the 
WIMP (Windows, Icons, Menus, Pointers) interfaces that have be -
come popular and standardised on personal computers the last 
twenty-five years. As described by Florian Cramer in this volume,  
the term interface indicates many different contact points and ex -
changes between different programs and data layers in a computer, 
between different machines (e.g. in a network), between humans 
and machines (such as graphical user interfaces), and as a mediator 
between humans (e.g. in net culture, interface culture and the  
public sphere). Some interfaces seem more or less mechanical – such 
as the USB interface that most of us know as a plug, but which is in 
fact an interface that specifies how communication between devices 
is established – while others are more clearly directed towards human 
understanding and cultural traditions such as interfaces for compu-
ter games or digital art. All interfaces, however, are designs that com-
bine – and translate – signs and signals. As such, the interface is at 
the core of the computer. It is not possible to ‘unveil’ the computer 
through a deconstruction of the interface. The code behind the  
interface is just another interface in the layered ‘mise en abîme’  
architecture of the computer. The functioning of the interface, its  
designed juxtaposing of human signs and machine signals, is there-
fore essential to the functioning of the computer.
The question of interface aesthetics is intrinsically linked to our 
perception of the interface. If it is not possible to fully ‘unveil’ the 
‘mise en abîme’ of the interface we can, however, elucidate how  
interfaces can embed choices, conduct, languages, and ultimately 
values, worldviews and aesthetics into technical infrastructures. The 
word aesthetics derives from the Greek ‘aisthesis’ that means sense 
perception, and today we perceive our environment through inter-
faces. Aesthetic theory consequently needs to develop a critical  
vocabulary towards computers and interfaces, an interface criticism, 
and this book aims to be one such contribution. An aesthetic aspect 
christian ulrik andersen & søren bro pold
9

of the interface is usually subordinated to a functionalistic dimen -
sion (e.g. the use of buttons for actions) or even a stylistic dimension 
(interfaces may look good or feel good). Conversely, in this book  
interface aesthetics will be developed as a critical investigation of 
interfaces, what they mean for – and how they function in – contem-
porary culture. 
With the subtitle Aesthetics Beyond Buttons  we want to point to  
the working in, between, behind and beyond the interfaces: the  
mediation and computation in and between the various layers and 
actors in and around interfaces. We do not subscribe to the idea of 
transcending the interface, nor do we believe that there is an essen-
tial core of the computer, but rather that its meaning and function-
ing lie in the interface’s combination of signals and signs, computa-
tion and medium, executive buttons and alluring metaphors. There 
is no essential truth hidden in the code and no privileged vantage 
point for finding such a truth, but instead interfaces and interfacing 
with its layers of mediation and computation open up spaces for crit-
icism: A criticism that draws upon recent theoretical developments 
such as code criticism, media aesthetics, software criticism, and  
media archaeology as well as more established theoretical traditions 
within aesthetics. 
Consequently, our investigation of the interface does not stop at 
the computer’s surface but goes beyond the buttons and reaches 
‘back’ into history, and ‘through’ to the human senses and percep-
tion, ‘behind’ the concept of the interface, ‘down’ into the machine, 
‘out’ into society and culture. This book is subsequently divided into 
five sections that overlap in many ways, but which also can be seen 
as five dimensions in interface criticism: displays and history, sen-
sation and perception, representation and computation, software 
and code, culture and politics.
back : Displays and history.  When looking at a computer, we see 
not only its hardware but also its representation as texts and images 
displayed on a screen. Perceived as screens and display mechanisms, 
computer interfaces are not new but belong to a long and continu-
ous tradition of media displays dating back to the 19th century and 
even further. This book section will examine the screen in relation 
Interface Criticism – Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
10

to both the historical development of a screen-mediated public 
sphere and an archaeology of video art and installations that repre-
sent cybernetic activities. Both of these historical perspectives lead 
to corrections of contemporary understandings of displays.
Currently, interfaces are spreading into the urban public space as 
both small portable devices and big architectural screens. In his 
“Monumental Attractions: An Archaeology of Public Media Displays”, 
erkki huhtamo depicts a thought-provoking and often forgotten 
history of public media displays. Even in the 19th century signboards, 
billboards, various projection forms as well as an audiovisual exten-
sion of the telephone were used for attracting people’s attention  
by displaying news and advertisements in the city landscape.  
Acknowledgement of the past not only helps us frame contempo -
rary urban interfaces, it also enables us to challenge the visual his-
torian Jonathan Crary’s hypothesis of modern media spectatorship 
as an interiorised and privatised mode of experience. Rather than 
separating the viewer from the surroundings, one needs to under-
stand the experience of urban displays as rooted in a milieu of noises, 
competing imagery and other distractive elements of the modern 
landscape. 
While Erkki Huhtamo goes back to the 19th century’s public dis-
plays, bodil marie stavning thomsen goes back to the video art 
scene of the 1960s in order to investigate changes in how we per -
ceive and construct the imagery of interfaces. In “The Haptic Inter-
face – On signal transmissions and events”, she explores the history 
behind the outspoken use of different forms of haptic imagery in  
reality TV, direct news broadcasting and documentary film formats. 
She argues that among others Nam June Paik and Les Levine were 
the forerunners of a new media immediacy now associated with the 
real-time imagery of surveillance cameras and webcams.
through : Sensation and perception.  The appearance and cultural 
diffusion of interfaces affect the way the world is perceived and 
sensed. Based on human input, the computer processes and presents 
an output that is often the starting point for new human input into 
the computer, and so on. As such, the human-computer interface is 
an input/output device where humans exist in a symbiosis with the 
christian ulrik andersen & søren bro pold
11

cybernetic system of the computer. In a time where our relationship 
with the world often depends on an interface (the steering of a car 
is run by a computer, knowledge is accessed through a web browser, 
play takes place in a computer game, etc.), our sense perception is 
influenced by the interface. This book section will discuss this influ-
ence and how it is articulated in contemporary net and software art.
In the development of and discourses around interfaces there has 
always been a strong urge to bypass representation and ‘jack’ direct-
ly in to the human brain, consciousness, perceptions and feelings. 
In her article “The interface at the skin”, lone koefoed hansen  
looks at how two contemporary experimental dresses made by 
Philips within the field of wearable computing subscribe to the  
concept of ‘ideal communication’. In her article, she explains how 
this particular type of communication is linked to the paranormal 
phenomena of mind reading and telepathy and argues that sensor 
based wearable computing is the newest example of a technological 
development implicitly or explicitly aiming at manifesting two uto-
pian parameters of communication: immediacy and instantaneity. 
Though clearly utopian, this manifestation has served as a way to 
brand Philips and thus, paradoxically, enters into the more tradi -
tional communication circuit of public relations.
søren bro pold ’s article “Interface Perception – The Cybernet-
ic Mentality and Its Critics: Ubermorgen.com” presents a model for 
a cultural understanding of the cybernetic feedback loop between 
human and computer. Using the example of the artist group Uber-
morgen.com, he furthermore discusses how cybernetic loops influ-
ence both our culture and not least our perception and mentality. 
Ubermorgen.com explores ways to stage a criticism from within the 
cybernetic system, attacking both its function and its represen  -
tation. Using inverted cybernetic strategies the group addresses  
the cultural role of Google while also examining how entering a  
cybernetic loop may create new mental illnesses. 
behind : Representation and computation.  The concept of the in-
terface carries strong connotations towards the graphic human-
computer interface with menus, icons, etc. The computer interface 
is often seen as a screenbased aesthetic representation of the func-
Interface Criticism – Aesthetics Beyond Buttons
12

tionality of the computer. As such, interfaces are translating the 
computational processes into soothing, well-known or ‘user-friendly’ 
visuals and metaphors as known from much commercial software, 
subsequently disguising the computer as something well known. 
This common understanding of the interface and its aesthetics as 
surface, aestheticisation and consequently a hiding of the compu-
tational processes are criticised in this section of the book, and it  
is argued that we need to subject our understanding of interfaces 
and how we co-exist with computational processes through them to 
critical scrutiny. As a result, an interface criticism should include  
a criticism of the concept of the interface as a crucial concern and 
point of departure.
In a critical evaluation of both the interface and aesthetics,   
florian cramer ’s “What Is Interface Aesthetics, or What Could It 
Be (Not)?” discusses the graphical user interface as an aesthetic 
choice separating users from programmers and favouring beautiful 
transparency over the sublime opacity of the hidden programming 
interface. However, interfaces can be much more than just human-
computer user interfaces (e.g. an interface between components in 
the hardware or between hardware and software). Discussing inter-
face aesthetics, we need to get past the classic Kantian dichotomy 
of the beautiful versus the sublime. Digital artistic practice has  
often been biased towards the latter, but we need to address all  
dimensions of interfaces and not stay on the visual surface. There-
fore, Cramer argues that interface aesthetics should not be devel -
oped as a stable perspective but as a critical paradigm within media 
theories and computer science, embracing aesthetics as a way to 
critically analyse technology.
Also dragana antic and matthew fuller argue that we 
need to look in other directions than the classic graphical user  
interface to fully understand what is currently happening with the 
concept. In their article “The Computation of Space”, they propose 
to think about the question of computation and interface with  
specific reference to the production of space. With embedded and 
ubiquitous computing we move beyond the classic screenbased  
interface towards interpellating computation into multiple kinds  
of devices and processes. As the interface becomes increasingly  
christian ulrik andersen & søren bro pold
13