Save StorySave this storySave StorySave this storyA piano duet does not necessarily require the cooperation of two humans. Sometimes beautiful music is the result of a less conventional partnership---like, say, between a human and a computer programmed with slime mold.During a recent concert, Eduardo Miranda performed a moody composition with an interactive biocomputer he and his students programmed with the fungus Physarum polycephalum. As Miranda, a professor at Plymouth University’s Centre for Computer Music Research, strikes a piano’s keys, you hear the biocomputer respond with an ethereal twinkling. It’s a strange, alien effect, not unlike hearing a slightly distorted echo of your voice after shouting into a canyon.The duet is the result of more than a year’s research into how we might program computers not with silicon but with living matter. It turns out that slime mold, a little understood organism, makes for an adept, ever-evolving electrical component. Miranda and his team (including Ph.D. student Ed Braund, who is leading the research) discovered that slime mold, when grown on a circuit board, can store information about electrical charges, sort of like a memory chip.When Miranda tickles the keys, information about the notes is sent via a microphone to a computer, which translates the sounds into electrical signals that are sent to the biocomputer. The slime mold processes these electrical signals and sends that information back to the conventional computer, which then creates voltages. These voltages cause electromagnets, hovering above the piano strings, to vibrate the strings, causing the wobbly notes you hear.Sound confusing? It is a little bit. The main takeaway is that the biocomputer is reacting to the notes Miranda plays in real time, creating an imprecise translation of what Miranda just played based on how the slime mold is growing. Though the notes created by the biocomputer are always related to the notes Miranda played---sometimes a note in a chord will be missing, sometimes the chord will be inverted, sometimes there will be an extra note---Miranda has no way of knowing what he’ll hear. “I found it so interesting that the piano has a double identity,” he says.This is great for making art. Unlike collaborating with regular computers, a biocomputer introduces a whole new level of improvisation, poeticism, and expressiveness. There’s no reliance on algorithms to create randomness---living systems have an element of uncertainty built into them. “It’s almost as if I’m interacting with a living, sentient being," he says, as if out of a scene in the film Her. "But at the end of the day, it’s a machine.”Liz writes about where design, technology, and science intersect. ... Read MoreXTopicsartPerformancedesignI Really, Really Want the 3,600-Piece Lego U.S.S. EnterpriseThis $400 set comes with minifigures of the complete Next Gen crew, including Picard, Riker, and Wesley Crusher’s portable tractor beam.How Do Metal Detectors Work?What sneaky invisible forces enable these instruments to locate buried treasure?In Orbit You Have to Slow Down to Speed UpDriving a spacecraft around a planet isn’t anything like driving on a planet. A physicist explains orbital navigation.How Genes Have Harnessed Physics to Grow Living ThingsThe same pulling force that causes “tears” in a glass of wine also shapes embryos. It’s another example of how genes exploit mechanical forces for growth and development.Analog Photography: The Beginner’s Guide to Film CamerasWhich film camera should you get? Which films are the best? We demystify the world of analog photography to help you get started.Physicists Create a Thermometer for Measuring ‘Quantumness’“Anomalous” heat flow, which at first appears to violate the second law of thermodynamics, gives physicists a way to detect quantum entanglement without destroying it.Nike’s Robotic Shoe Gets Humans One Step Closer to CyborgProject Amplify is Nike’s latest attempt to put some spring in your step with help from a powered mechanism that enhances the natural movement of the human ankle and lower leg.One of Our Favorite Pairs of Binoculars Is $80 OffThese lightweight Celestron binoculars offer great magnification for the price.Unpicking How to Measure the Complexity of KnotsTwo mathematicians have proved that a straightforward question—how hard is it to untie a knot?—has a complicated answer.Climate Change Made Hurricane Melissa 4 Times More Likely, Study SuggestsUnusually warm ocean temperatures fueled one of the worst hurricanes on record. New research finds climate change increased the storm’s likelihood.The Best Binoculars to Zoom In on Real LifeWhether for bird-watching or baseball-spotting, we break down prices and specs to find the best pair for you.Exclusive LegalZoom Promo Code for 10% Off Services for 2025Save on top services at LegalZoom, like LLC registration, incorporation, estate plans, and more with coupons and deals from WIRED.