FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 
R. s. Gluskin, M. Jacoby, and T. D. Reader 
UNIVAC 
A Division of the Sperry Rand Corporation 
Blue Bell, Pennsylvania 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of fluids (both liquids and gases) for 
the transmission and amplification of power has 
been common for over a century. This power 
has been controlled by valves, pistons, and other 
mechanical parts. Within the past decade con­
siderable attention has been given, both in this 
country and in Russia,l to the use of fluids for 
control and logic functions, and until recently 
these systems also employed mechanical moving 
parts. In 1960 the Diamond Ordnance Fuze 
Laboratory (now the Harry Diamond Labora­
tories) of the U. S. Army announced a fluid am­
plifier with no moving parts2-a discovery 
which seems likely to revolutionize the whole 
field of fluid logic and control. 
There are two fundamental mechanisms in­
volved in pure fluid amplification: One is mo­
mentum transfer, and the other is wall effect. 
A jet of fluid having a density p, a velocity V, 
and a cross sectional area A has a momentum 
Ml = p V'2 A. Consider now a smaller jet, of 
momentum M 2, which we shall call the control 
jet, impinging at right angles on the larger jet, 
of momentum M 1 , which we shall call the power 
jet, as is shown in Figure 1. From conservation 
of momentum principles it can be seen that the 
power jet will be deflected through an angle 
() = tan-1 M 2. If a receiver or catcher is placed Ml . 
as shown in Figure 1 all the energy of the 
power jet can, in principle at least, be recap­
tured if there is zero control jet flow. But as 
631 
the control jet flow is increased the power jet 
will be deflected, and less and less energy will 
enter the receiver. 
The wall effect is shown in Figure 2. If a 
wall is placed close to a jet it is found that the 
jet appears to be attracted to the wall and will 
often attach itself to the wall quite strongly. 
The reason for this is that as the jet moves it 
entrains fluid from the surrounding medium. 
This entrained fluid must be made up by fluid 
from afar. If a ,vall is placed close to one side 
of a jet, the flow of replacement fluid is im­
peded, resulting in a slightly lower pressure on 
the side of the jet close to the wall than on the 
other side where there is no impediment. Con­
sequently, the jet will bend toward the wall, 
POWER JET 
MOMENTUM=~ 
• 
~ 
~ CONTROL JET 
MOMENTUM = M2 
Figure 1. Momentum Exchange. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

632 PROCEEDINGS-FALL JOINT COMPUTER CONFERENCE, 1964 
J 
) 
.1 
Figure 2. Wall Effect. 
making it even harder for replacement fluid to 
flow into the low-pressure region, and even­
tually lock onto the wall altogether, forming 
what is called a low-pressure bubble upstream 
from the point of attachment. This wall effect 
is sometimes called the Coanda effect. 3 Both 
wall effect and momentum transfer are usually 
involved in most fluid amplifiers. 
The Harry Diamond Laboratories' amplifier, 
shown in Figure 3, consists of a power jet, A, 
an interaction region, B, two control jets, C and 
D, and two output passages, E and F. 
,The amplifier may be made to operate either 
proportionally or in a digital fashion, depend­
ing on slight differences in geometry. In the 
proportional device, fluid issuing from jet A 
will divide almost equally between output pas­
sages E and F in the absence of any control 
signals at C or D; but if a small amount of fluid 
is blown into the device through control port C, 
the main jet well be deflected to the right, and 
more of it will exit from passage F than from 
E F 
c B D 
H J 
A 
Figure 3. Representation of Amplifier Developed at 
Harry Diamond Laboratories. 
passage E. For small signals, the output varia­
tion can be made fairly linear with respect to 
the input, and furthermore, the output varia­
tion will be larger than the input variation, thus 
producing gain or amplification. 
If certain changes are made in the geometry 
of the proportional amplifier, namely, if the 
divider tip G is moved further downstream and 
if the walls HH and J J are moved closer to the 
centerline of symmetry, the amplifier becomes 
bistable or digital. That is, the power jet bends 
by itself and attaches to one or the other of the 
sidewalls so that even in the absence of any con­
trol signal, substantially all the flow is from a 
single output passage, for example, passage E. 
Assuming an output from passage E, if the 
pressure at control port C is now slowly in­
creased, no change occurs until a certain 
threshold value is reached, at which point the 
power jet suddenly switches to the other side 
and exits from output passage F. If the control 
signal is returned to zero, the power jet re­
mains locked to wall J J and continues to issue 
from output passage F. Thus, the device has 
memory capability and is the logical equivalent 
of the electronic flip-flop. 
All the other fundamental switching and logic 
functions which are now performed electroni­
cally can also be implemented by pure fluid de­
vices. Figure 4 shows a pure fluid inverter. This 
device is purposely made very asymmetrical 
so that in the absence of a control signal the 
fluid flows essentially in a straight line and exits 
from the left-hand leg. Only when a control 
signal of sufficient strength is present will the 
jet be blown over to the right-hand leg. The 
wall lock-on effect on the right-hand leg is mini­
mized, and when the control signal disappears 
the output will immediately return to the left­
hand leg. Thus, the output from the left-hand 
leg is the inverse of the control signal; the out­
put from the right-hand leg is the control signal 
amplified. 
An OR gate may be readily constructed by 
converting the pressure energy in two or more 
signals to velocity energy and directing this into 
a common receiver, as is shown in Figure 5. 
Because of the vector quality of the two jets, 
there will be very little leakage of signal from 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 633 
A 
A 
Figure 4. Inverter. 
one input backward through the other unless 
the output is substantially blocked, in which 
case the fluid would have no place else to go. 
The purpose of the hvo side passages shown in 
Figure 5 is to provide for fluid escape in just 
this eventuality. If a high impedance is pre-
sented to the output the fluid will escape 
through the side bleeds rather than reversing 
and flowing into the other signal input. 
The vector properties of high-velocity jets 
are also made use of in the AND gate (Figure 
6). If the signal A is present alone it will pass 
straight through the AND gate and vent to at­
mosphere, and similarly for B alone. If sig­
nals A and B are present simultaneously, how­
ever, and have approximately equal amplitudes, 
then the resulting jet will make an angle of 45° 
to the original jets and will be caught in the re­
ceiver placed at this position. With proper de­
sign of the receiver exact balance of the two 
signals is not necessary. Ratios of 2 : 1 are 
easily accommodated. 
The combination of the OR gate and the in­
verter as shown in Figure 7 gives an extremely 
powerful element. The right-hand output is 
the amplified OR function of the inputs while 
simultaneously the left-hand output gives the 
amplified NOR function, that is, A . B. This 
principle has been extended to achieve a NOR 
gate with a fan-in and fan-out of four; that is, 
the device has been provided with four input 
terminals. The presence of a signal on anyone 
of these terminals will switch the device off, and 
the output has been divided and channeled to 
four output terminals so that four identical ele­
ments can be driven from one element. In this 
NOR gate the OR output is not provided. 
As is well known, all logic and switching 
functions can be implemented with NOR gates 
alone. A flip-flop, for example, can be made by 
interconnecting two NOR elements, as is shown 
in Figure 8. 
In this configuration, one element is in the 
1 state, and its output is used to switch the 
other element into the 0 state. The elements re­
main stable in their respective states until an 
outside signal changes the state of the flip-flop. 
With reference to Figure 8, assume that element 
A is in the 1 state, that is, its output signal is 
in leg d. This signal is sent to element B 
through input j which switches the element 
into the 0 state, that is, the jet is diverted to 
.. ~ 
A-t-tj 
Figure 5. OR Gate. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

634 PROCEEDINGS~F ALL JOINT COMPUTER CONFERENCE, 1964 
A·B 
B 
Figure 6. AND Gate. 
output f. There is no signal in leg e of element 
B; therefore, element A is not affected by ele­
ment B. The flip-flop will remain stable in this 
state until an outside signal is applied to ele­
ment A by way of input h. When the signal 
appears, A will be switched to the 0 state, and 
the jet will be diverted from leg d to leg c. The 
signal to input j of B will go off, and the ele­
ment will switch from the 0 state to the 1 state, 
that is, the jet will switch from leg f to leg e. 
The signal from B will then be applied to A 
through input g. When the outside signal 
through h is removed, the signal through g will 
keep A in the 0 state. The flip-flop has been 
switched, and it will remain stable in this state 
until another outside signal is applied to input 
k of element B. 
FLODAC is built entirely of NOR gates and 
requires about 250 of these elements to do its 
job. FLODAC, incidentally, stands for Fluid 
Operated Digital Automatic Computer. 
Why Fluid Amplifiers? 
Granting the feasibility of constructing com­
plex digital systems from fluid amplifiers, what 
is the motivation for doing so? What advan­
tages, if any, do fluid amplifiers have over their 
well-established electronic counterparts? The 
use of fluid amplifiers rather than their elec­
tronic counterparts may be justified on the 
A-a A+B 
Figure 7. NOR Gate. 
basis of four significant advantages: reliability, 
environmental immunity, low cost, and absence 
of r-f radiation. Each of these advantages is 
briefly discussed below: 
1. Reliability: Pure fluid amplifiers have no 
moving parts except the fluid itself. There 
is nothing to wear out, nothing to age, 
nothing to burn out. With the proper se­
lection of structural material and fluid, 
there are no potential chemical or solid-
d e 
t t 
A B 
Figure 8. FLODAC Flip-Flop. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 635 
state reactions. There need be no deli­
cate structures. In short, the life of a 
fluid amplifier should be practically in­
finite, whether in use or quiescent. About 
the only conceivable cause of deterioration 
would be dirt in the fluid, and this can be 
controlled easily by filtration and the use 
of closed-cycle systems. 
The fluid amplifier art is still too young 
for masses of statistical data on reliabil­
ity to have been compiled. However, the 
nature and operation of these devices are 
such that extremely favorable compari­
sons with electronic and other types of de­
vices can be expected.4 
2. Environmental Immunity: Fluid ampli­
fiers can be made of almost any solid ma­
terial, for example, plastics, metals, glass, 
or ceramics. If the right materials are se­
lected, operation is possible under environ­
mental conditions which preclude the use 
of electronic devices. For example, ce­
ramic fluid amplifiers could operate at 
white heat. Metal fluid amplifiers should 
be operable in intense radiation fields. 
With the proper materials and assembly 
procedures, shocks, or accelerations, of 
thousands 
problem. 
3. Low Cost: Fluid amplifiers consist basi­
cally of rectangular channels in a suitable 
material. They can be fabricated by any 
one of a number of extremely low-cost 
methods, such as casting, injection mold­
ing, stamping, or etching. Entire circuits 
of fluid amplifiers, including the intercon­
necting passageways, can be formed by 
such methods in one low-cost operation. 
Planes could be stacked one on top of an­
other with holes in the planes at the 
proper locations for the necessary inter­
connections. With techniques such as 
these, which are already being developed; 
it is estimated that the cost of fluid am­
plifier circuits may be as much as 100 
times less than the cost of comparable 
electronic circuits. 
4. R~f Radiation: 'No electromagnetic energy 
is radiated by fluid circuits; consequently, 
a very common and often serious problem 
associated with electronic logic, namely, 
r-f radiation, is eliminated. Often exten­
sive and costly measures must be taken to 
shield electronic equipment to prevent in­
terference with other equipment or com­
munications or to prevent detection of 
radiated intelligence by hostile agencies. 
However, such measures are never 100 
percent effective. Also, external radiation 
can seriously affect electronic equipment 
by causing errors or malfunctions. Both 
of these problems are completely elimi­
nated by fluid devices, which neither emit 
nor are affected by radiation. 
Operational Speed 
Fluid amplifiers have one significant disad­
vantage: their operational speed is relatively 
slow. Switching times are of the order of a 
millisecond, and signal propagation time is of 
the order of a millisecond per foot. Fluid am­
plifiers, at present, are only approaching kilo­
cycle rates of operation as opposed to the mega­
cycle and higher rates common in electronic 
systems. Speeds can be expected to improve, of 
course, but nanosecond switching times are not 
foreseeable today. Because of this speed limita­
tion, there may be applications where fluid am­
plifiers are not suitable. 
It should be noted that the inherent speed 
limitation can be offset appreciably by taking 
advantage of the low cost and high reliability of 
fluid amplifiers, which make it economical to 
compensate for much of the speed deficIt .. by 
making extensive use of parallel and polymor­
phic operation. 
In any event, there are numerous applications 
where the speed of fluid circuitry is adequate. 
Today's system designer must realize both the 
merits and shortcomings of these new elements; 
by appraising his problem requirements objec­
tively, he can use fluid amplifiers with excellent 
results wherever their advantages enable them 
to do the job better and/or more economically. 
SPECIFICATIONS AND LOGICAL DESIGN 
Every general-purpose digital computer must 
have means for accomplishing four basic func­
tions: Memory, Arithmetic, Control, and Input! 
Output. Consequently, it was necessary to pro­
vide these functions if we were to fully meet the 
goal of demonstrating a generalized fluid com-
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

636 PROCEEDINGS-FALL JOINT COMPUTER CONFERENCE, 1964 
puter, even though on a very small scale. All 
four functions are fully and formally developed 
inFLODAC. 
The problems of memory size, word size, and 
instruction set are all interrelated. The objec­
tive was to build a very small air-powered gen­
eral-purpose digital computer which could be 
programmed to do a few elementary problems. 
At least three instructions seemed necessary to 
prove generality: an Arithmetic instruction, a 
Data Transfer instruction, and a Conditional 
Jump instruction. Since two bits are needed to 
specify three instructions, a fourth instruction 
becomes possible without any increase in word 
size. It was decided to make this a Halt instruc­
tion. The four instructions used then are: 
Instruction Code Explanation 
Transfer T m 
Add A m 
Jump J n 
10 (A)~m 
11 (m) + (A) ~A 
01 Go to instruction in 
memory location n if 
(A) # 0; otherwise 
continue with the next 
instruction in the 
memory. 
Halt H 00 Stop the computer. 
After a few trials it was found that a reason­
able program could be written using all four in­
structions with a memory of only four words. 
This program, which is the basic test program 
for FLODAC, will be discussed later. 
A four-word memory implies two bits for ad­
dressing, and this, with the two bit operation 
code, fixes the word length at four bits. The 
first two bits of a word are the operation code 
and the last two the address. Alternately, a 
word may consist of numerical data only. 
To recapitulate, FLODAC has four instruc­
tions and four words of memory; each word is 
four bits long. To compensate as much as pos­
sible for the speed disadvantage of fluid ele­
ments, operation is bit parallel. 
Figure 9 shows the overall block diagram of 
FLODAC. Each instruction is processed in 
four steps by the step counter which is driven 
from the master clock. The control counter 
contains the address of the next instruction to 
MEMORY 
00 M4 M3 M2 MI 
01 
~T r-r ~r -r-II r-- ---t--- -=---
10 r-- ---t------,--
! J 
ARITHMETIC REGISTER 
A4 A3 A2 AI 
-.1. .L .L .1. 
J 
STATIC REGISTER 
----, INSTRUCTION ADDRESS 
~ FUNCTION }= - S4 S3 ~ MEMORY SELECT 
-
S2 SI I- SELECT 
J. J. J. J. 
f f 
I STEP I 
CONTROL 
COUNTER I COUNTER 
"-C2\ CI 
1 
4 CLOCK ~ MANUAL CONTROL 
ONE II + INSTRUCTION CONTINUOUS START 
.L J.. J.. 
Figure 9. FLODAC, Block Diagram. 
be executed and, except during the fulfillment of 
the Conditional Jump instruction, is augmented 
by one at the end of each instruction cycle. Dur­
ing step 1 the control counter operates the mem­
ory select circuits, and by the end of step 1 the 
specified memory word, which contains the next 
instruction, is read into the static register. The 
two left-hand bits are decoded as to operation, 
and this information is sent to the function 
select circuits, where, in conjunction with step 
counter and clock signals, the necessary gating 
pulses for all instructions are generated. The 
two right-hand bits, specifying the operand ad­
dress, are sent to the memory select circuits, 
permitting the required data word to be read 
out. All this takes place during step 1. The ac­
tual instruction execution is carried out during 
some or all of the last three steps. 
The Add instruction is carried out in two 
stages. The first stage is completed during step 
3 and consists of adding the word in the mem­
ory to the word in the arithmetic register with­
out regard to carry. This portion of the Add 
instruction changes a bit in the arithmetic regis­
ter from a 1 to 0 or vice versa, whenever there 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 637 
is a 1 in the corresponding position of the word 
to be added. The second stage of the addition 
process starts at the beginning of step 4 and 
causes a carry pulse to be sent to the next more 
significant bit position wherever the sum bit is 
presently a zero and the addend bit was a one. 
Means are provided to rapidly transmit the 
carries to subsequent stages if the original 
carry pulse would in turn produce another carry 
at the next higher bit position. This carry gen­
eration and propagation ·proceeds asynchro­
nously and could continue during steps 4 and 1, 
if necessary. It is actually completed by the 
end of step 4. 
A brief description of the operation of the 
memory may be in order here. The memory is 
WRITE WORD 
SELECT 
A REGISTER BIT 
81T1 
81T3 
81T4 
WORD 4 WORD 3 WORD 2 
a two-dimensional matrix array using flip-flops 
as the storage means. 
Figure 10 is a schematic of the FLODAC 
memory. Each block represents a NOR element 
with four inputs and four outputs. Lines into 
the left side and bottom of the blocks indicate 
inputs to the elements, and lines from the right 
side and top represent outputs from the ele­
ments. The memory contains four words, each 
consisting of four bits of information. The 
words are located in vertical columns, the right 
column being the first or 00 word address. The 
horizontal rows contain the same information 
bit for all four words, the. top row being the 
least significant bit. 
WORD 1 
READOUT 
81T1 
READOUT 
81T2 
READOUT 
81T3 
READOUT 
81T4 
Figure 10. FLODAC Memory, Schematic Diagram. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

638 PROCEEDINGS-FALL JOINT COMPUTER CONFERENCE, 1964 
Writing into memory is a three-step opera­
tion. First, the memory storage location is se­
lected by the static register and the memory se­
lect circuits. Second, a clear memory signal 
from the function select erases any information 
already in that word location by resetting all 
flip-flops to zero. Third, the word in the ac­
cumulator is gated into the memory location by 
another function select signal. The write op­
eration utilizes three counts of the step counter 
cycle. 
A simple nondestructive readout is employed. 
Each of the 16 memory flip-flops feeds into an 
intermediate NOR element which in turn sends 
a signal to one of the four memory readout ele­
ments (far right in schematic). These inter­
mediate elements are controlled by the memory 
select circuits. When a particular address· is 
chosen for readout, the memory select turns off 
the intermediate elements of the other three 
words, thus prohibiting any output signals from 
these words. Parallel operation is used. There­
fore, all bits of a word are written into and 
read out simultaneously. 
Referring back to the overall block diagram, 
Figure 9, it is seen that a manual control unit 
is provided which makes possible two modes of 
operation: continuous and one instruction. To 
enter information into the memory of FLODAC 
the computer is placed in the one instruction 
mode. A word is then set up manually in the 
A register, and a Transfer instruction specify­
ing the desired memory location of the word is 
set up in the static register. When the START 
switch, also located in the manual control unit, 
is activated, the word in the A register will be 
transferred into the memory. This process is 
repeated for each word to be loaded. It should 
be mentioned perhaps that the act of setting a 
switch consists merely in putting one's finger 
lightly over a bleed hole on the control console 
(Figure 11). The resulting back pressure will 
then set a flip-flop or generate a fluid pulse, as 
the case may be. I t is difficult to imagine a sim­
pler form of keyboard. The contents of the A 
register and static register are displayed by 
using bipositional visual indicators. The in­
dicators consist of a colored ball in a glass tube. 
The balls are lifted into view by a pressure sig­
nal when the flip-flops are in the 1 state. 
CONSTRUCTION, AND TEST 
Production of Logical Elements 
The NOR elements used in FLODAC were 
made by injection-molding a thermoplastic ma­
terial into a metal negative master. 
The physical size of the fluid devices is a 
function of the width of the power input noz­
zles. The widths of the nozzles used on the 
FLODAC elements were either 0.016 inch or 
0.020 inch. These widths were chosen because 
they allowed the use of standard laboratory 
fabrication techniques and equipment and af­
forded accessible tolerances. Increased dimen­
sional accuracy was obtained by machining the 
master from a large template five times nonnal 
size and reducing by means of a pantomill. 
Reducing the size of the elements with the 
above fabrication method is limited by the size 
of the cutting tool used in making the master. 
A nozzle width of 0.005 inch might be attain­
able, but present photoetching processes are 
able to produce still smaller and more accurate 
models. 
Testing the Individual Elements 
Because of dimensional variations occurring 
during fabrication, the characteristics of the 
elements sometimes differed. It was necessary, 
therefore, to set up a testing procedure to check 
out all elements before using them in the 
FLODAC circuits. Two testing criteria were 
chosen. The first was that the pressure recov­
ery be at least a set minimum value. Pressure 
recovery is the ratio, expressed in percentage, 
Figure 11. Control Console. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 639 
of the output pressure to the input supply pres­
sure. At the present state-of-the-art, the NOR 
elements have a rather low pressure recovery 
factor. The FLODAC elements averaged about 
30 percent, although other experimental models 
have reached almost 50 percent. Acceptability 
for FLODAC required a pressure recovery of at 
least 28 percent. 
The second test for the elements was gain. 
This is the ratio of the element output to the 
input signal required to switch the. element. A 
figure of 1.6 was chosen as the criterion here. 
The supply pressure for the elements in 
FLODAC was 20 inches of water (0.8 of a 
pound per square inch). This means that the 
output pressure would have to be at least five 
inches of water and that the elements would 
have to switch with less than three inches of 
water input signal pressure. Elements not meet­
ing these specifications were rej ected. All tests 
were made with the device loaded with the 
equivalent load of four other elements. 
Method of Assembly and Testing of Circuits 
To simplify construction and testing of 
FLODAC, the computer was divided into two 
parts. Each half consists of a power supply 
manifold and three rows of NOR elements. 
There is a total of 280 elements in FLODAC. 
The existing circuitry requires only 250 NOR 
elements, but the extra elements were added in 
case replacements had to be made or for possi­
ble changes or extensions to the logic. The NOR 
element power inputs are plugged directly into 
the manifold. Interconnection of the elements 
is done by simply connecting one of the four 
outputs of an element to one of the four inputs 
of the next logical element in the circuit. These 
connections were made with plastic tubing. 
One side of the computer contains the clock, 
step counter, instruction portion of the static 
register, function table, and A register circuits; 
the other side contains the control counter, ad­
dress portion of static register, memory select, 
and memory circuits. 
The two halves were wired and tested inde­
pendently. Simulated pressure signals were 
used where necessary when testing the circuits 
on each side. When both were working sepa­
rately, the entire computer was assembled, all 
the cross connections between the two sections 
were made, and appropriate outputs were con­
nected to the control panel indicators. To fa­
cilitate maintenance, FLODAC was constructed 
so that one side hinges out, exposing all of the 
internal circuitry (Figure 12). 
The entire system was then tested, and after 
straightening out a few minor problems in the 
circuitry, FLODAC was working reliably as an 
independent, coordinated system. Figure 13 
is an overall view of the finished FLODAC as­
sembly. 
Testing the Complete Computer 
After all the elements had been intercon­
nected, the system was ready for a complete 
checkout. This was done by carrying out sim­
ple programs which required use of the four 
computer instructions: Add, Transfer, Jump, 
and Halt. Instructions were stored in the four­
word, four-bit memory unit. 
The FLODAC clock was capable of being 
pulsed manually so that a program could be 
carried out one step at a time and checked for 
correctness at every intermediate step. Pres­
sure taps connected to indicator manometers 
were placed at critical points throughout the 
computer circuitry. This showed the state of 
the elements and greatly simplified trouble­
shooting. 
When a program was working satisfactorily 
with manual clock control, the program was 
tried with automatic computer controls. In~ 
Figure 12. FLODAC Circuitry, Internal View. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

640 PROCEEDINGS-FALL JOINT COMPUTER CONFERENCE, 1964 
Figure 13. FLODAC. 
formation was stored in the memory, the 
process was started by manually pressing the 
program START button, and the program was 
carried out automatically. 
The most comprehensive test program makes 
use of all four instructions and is shown below 
as a matter of interest. 
Memory 
Location Instruction Address Explanation 
1 
2 
3 
4 
A 
T 
J 
xx 
4 (4) + (A)~A 
4 (A)~4 
1 Go to location 1 
if (A) =1= 0000; 
otherwise go to 
location 4. 
xx Arbitrary num­
ber; or Halt in­
struction if 0000. 
This program takes an arbitrary number 
(stored in memory location 4), adds it to the 
accumulator, transfers the sum back to memory 
location 4, tests to see if the number in the ac­
cumulator is now zero, and repeats this process 
automatically until the sum in the accumulator 
is zero. When this condition is reached, as it 
must be after at most five cycles, the Condi­
tional Jump back to 1, stored in memory loca­
tion 3, is not carried out, and the program 
moves on to memory location 4. The content of 
memory location 4 is now 0000, which is inter­
preted as a Halt instruction, and the computer 
stops. The above program, of course, doubles 
the number in the accumulator on each cycle 
after the first. 
Alternately, memory locations 2 and 3 can be 
interchanged, and in this case the accumulator 
will be augmented each cycle by the number 
initially stored in location 4 until it again 
reaches zero. In this form 16 cycles are possi~ 
ble. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
The individuai reiiabiiity test given to each 
component NOR element greatly reduced the 
probability of encountering any serious prob~ 
lems during the final checkout of the system. A 
few minor logic and performance problems did 
show up, but these were easily traced and cor~ 
rected. FLODAC was operating reliably only a 
few weeks after construction was begun. 
The nominal clock rate of FLODAC is ten 
cycles per second. This was chosen to avoid 
wave propagation and reflection problems 
which are potential dangers at not very much 
higher frequencies because of the long lead 
lengths involved and the lack of attention given 
to exact impedance matching. It should be 
pointed out that the speed of fluid signal pro­
pagation in air is almost one million times 
slower than the speed of signal propagation in 
electric wires. Thus, from the point of view of 
signal wave length, a frequency of ten cycles 
per second using air as the working medium is 
analogous to a frequency of ten megacycles in 
electronics. Simpler circuits built with elements 
identical with those in FLODAC, but compactly 
packaged, have operated with clock frequencies 
as high as 250 cycles per second. 
FLODAC has amply demonstrated that a 
pure fluid general-purpose digital computer is 
indeed feasible. The question remains: Is such 
a computer desirable? There are many areas 
in which fluid logic cannot hope to compete with 
electronic logic simply because of the speed Um­
itations inherent in fluid systems even if the ut~ 
most advantage is taken of parallel and poly~ 
morphic operation. 
Conversely, however, there are areas involv~ 
ing extreme environments, such as very high 
radiation levels or very high temperatures, 
where present-day electronics cannot hope to 
compete with fluids, and here fluid logic may 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)

FLODAC-A PURE FLUID DIGITAL COMPUTER 641 
supply the only means of solving many pressing 
military and space science problems. Between 
these two extremes there is a vast area where 
fluid logic does appear to be competitive with 
electronics and where the advantages and dis­
advantages of both approaches will have to be 
carefully studied. This area includes such de­
vices as adding machines, desk calculators, tab­
ulating machines, process control computers, 
and such peripherals as keyboards and punched 
card and paper tape readers. Here, timing 
rates are frequently below a kilocycle, and the 
speed disadvantage of fluid amplifiers disap­
pears. Here too, the tremendous cost advan­
tage plus the postulated reliability advantage 
makes fluid logic look very attractive indeed. 
It may further develop that, given sufficient 
cost and reliability advantages, the marketplace 
may well learn to live with slower computing 
speeds for small general-purpose computers. 
The authors believe that there is a vast role 
to be played by fluid technology in the computer 
field, and this view is shared by their company. 
UNIV AC's FLODAC is the precursor of what 
we hope will be long series of useful pure fluid 
systems of increasing complexity and decreas­
ing cost. 
REFERENCES 
1. AUGER, RAYMOND N., "Pneumatic Computer 
Research in the USSR," AUTOMATIC 
CONTROL, Vol. 13, No.6 (December 1960), 
pp.43-48. 
2. Refer to parts A through F of the Diamond 
Ordnance Fuze Laboratories, "News Re­
lease" for March 2, 1960. 
3. COANDA, H., "Precede et dispositif pour 
faire devier, une veine fluide penetrant autre 
fluids," Patent No. 788,140 (France), 217, 
1934. 
4. Fox, H. L., "A Comparison of the Reliabil­
ity of Electronic Components and Pure 
Fluid Amplifiers," Proceedings of the Fluid 
Amplification Symposium, October 1962, 
Diamond Ordnance Fuze Laboratories, 
Washington 25, D. C. 
From the collection of the Computer History Museum (www.computerhistory.org)