informationCircleIKEA Family members save $10 for every $100 spent thru 11/26*7 YTTERVÅG imagesSkip imagesAll mediaYTTERVÅG Four-poster bed frame, gray-brown/Luröy, Queen$599.00Price $ 599.00(43)|Q&A(18)Mattress and bedlinens are sold separately.Choose slatted bed base or mattress baseLuröy slatted bed baseChoose colorGray-brown/woodChoose sizeQueenKingHow to get itDeliveryChecking availability...In storeChecking availability...You must enable JavaScript to shop on IKEA.comIt's OK to change your mindReturn within 365 days for a full refund*. Learn moreLow Price GuaranteePrice drops? Get the difference back within 90 days with IKEA FamilyMore ways to payChecking payment options...You don’t need to live in a castle to sleep like royalty. The timeless and simple expression of this four-poster bed frame in a Scandinavian style fits just as well in a modern home.Article Number394.185.87Product detailsWhat's includedMeasurementsQuestions and answers(18)Product detailsBeautiful craftsmanship all the way around. Why not place it in the middle of the room to create impact?Adjustable bed sides allow you to use mattresses of different thicknesses.You can sit up comfortably in bed thanks to the high headboard – just prop some pillows behind your back and you will have a comfortable place to read or watch TV.The headboard in solid wood is sturdy to lean against and can serve as a room divider.The hard-wearing solid pine has natural variations in grain, color and texture, giving every bed a unique look.LURÖY slatted bed base with curved slats helps to absorb your body weight and supports your body, while the open construction allows air to circulate and keeps the mattress fresh.Good to knowLURÖY slatted bed base is included in the price, but is packaged separately.SKORVA midbeam is included in the price but packaged separately. It is required for the stability of the bed frame and to keep the mattress in place.Mattress and bedlinens are sold separately.Materials and careMaterialFour-poster bed frameSolid pine, Acrylic paintSlatted bed baseBed slats:Layer-glued wood veneer, Adhesive resin as coatingRibbon:100 %polyesterCenter support beamGalvanized steelCareFour-poster bed frame/center support beamWipe clean using a damp cloth and a mild cleaner.Wipe dry with a clean cloth.Safety and complianceIMPORTANT! Do not screw hooks, handles etc. onto the bed or hang things on it in which children can get caught on when playing. E.g. loops of rope, belts etc.Assembly and documentsAssembly instructionsYTTERVÅG Four-poster bed frame504.931.46Advice and care instructionsYTTERVÅG Four-poster bed frame504.931.46YTTERVÅG Four-poster bed frame504.931.46MeasurementsPackagingThis product comes as 4 packages.YTTERVÅGFour-poster bed frameArticle Number504.931.46This product has multiple packages.Width: 16 ½ "Height: 3 ¼ "Length: 68 "Weight: 50 lb 11 ozPackage(s): 1Width: 15 ¾ "Height: 3 ¼ "Length: 84 "Weight: 63 lb 6 ozPackage(s): 1LURÖYSlatted bed baseArticle Number001.602.15Width: 9 ½ "Height: 4 ¼ "Length: 30 ¼ "Weight: 24 lb 12 ozPackage(s): 1SKORVACenter support beamArticle Number901.245.34Width: 2 ½ "Height: 2 ¼ "Length: 54 ¾ "Weight: 7 lb 13 ozPackage(s): 1ReviewsHeadboard was difficultDavidThe bed is really pretty and seems well-made and, aside from the headboard, easy to assemble (did it by myself). The worst part was step 20. Because there was only one "wheel" per side, it was difficult to get the posts on evenly and make sure everything was fully seated. If there had been two or three per side it would have been much easier. Hypothetically appearance could be an issue, but I think if the wheels were on the back of the headboard and you were given covers to put on top of them then that would fix it. I do also wish the posts on top were narrower and came off easily so I could put regular curtains on them, but I suspect this bed wasn't really made for curtains. I don't understand the point of a four poster bed without curtains, but to each their own.3Love itSylmaI was a little overwhelmed when i saw all the parts.
I started assembling the bed but quickly found the instructions were very clear and easy to follow. I am 70 years old and was able to put this bed together bu myself except for attaching the side rails, I did need help with that. It took me a few hours but I took frequent rest breaks.
I LOVE my bed.
If I can do it, I promise you can too!5I love it!KarenI love how elegant this bed frame is. It's also very durable.
Tip: Choose a reinforced frame and that would be great!5Nice bed - easy to damageLilyI love how the bed looks put together, you do need some power tools to make the job easier. However it is sooooo easy to damage the wood which is too bad because maybe 10 years ago the quality seemed a lot better. I’ve had it for less than a month and any small bump will scrape the paint or damage the wood. 2Sturdy good looking bed frameRucheeI used TaskRabbit assembly. Have been using for over 6 months and frame remains sturdy, without any creaking or movement. Middle beam was included with boxes for my pick-up order. I elected to use a foundation instead of slats. 14.5 inch mattress on top of a 4.75 inches foundation. Fits perfectly, no issues. The height of the posts are tall enough for dramatic look, but there's enough clearance for a ceiling fan. Great looking bed, very happy with this purchase 5Amazing Bed - Truly elevates the SpaceJelaniThis is my first time purchasing a bed frame in my first home, and the Yttervag is amazing.
The elegance of this bed frame is beyond words.
I got the black frame which really grounds the room and creates a canvas where I can decorate the rest of the space however I'd like.
If you're concerned about quality, don't be. It's sturdy and doesn't rock or squeak at all.
I couldn't be more impressed or pleased with this purchase.
If you've been considering this purchase, go ahead and buy already!
You won't regret it.5Really great quality and look for the price! MirandaThe product is sturdy and nice looking! Great quality for the price! 54 Post BedJeffreyNot a bad bed.
It was for my 13 year old daughter.
Not sure how it would hold up to grown adults.
Easy to assemble - definitely two people.
4Lovely BedAmy teen loves her new bed. It was not terribly hard to assemble. The base slats were the most cumbersome part of the process. Color is perfect for her ocean/ coastal decor room. I wish the nightstand would have worked out but the parts were incorrect and had to return, it was pricey for a night stand anyway. 5Package doesn't include all needed pieces, they don't tell you that you have to purchase these separately AnonTwo essential pieces are NOT included in the packages. The central support beam and slats for the mattress are not included. You have to purchase these separately, but there is no way to know this until you start assembling the bed and see the pieces are missing. They will not give you these missing pieces unless you pay another $100. None of this is made clear before you purchase the bed.1Doesn't include all needed pieces for assembly. They don't tell you that you need to purchase another $100 worth of items to actually assemble the bed.AnonTwo essential pieces are NOT included in the packages. The central support beam and slats for the mattress are not included. You have to purchase these separately, but there is no way to know this until you start assembling the bed and see the pieces are missing. They will not give you these missing pieces unless you pay another $100. 1Nice bedValerieTook a few hours to put together and the bottom mattress slats do not screw down. They just lay across it but so far have had it a few months and have had no issues. Make sure if you have a ceiling fan the canopy part because this was an issue for the bedroom. Have to keep bed about 2 inches from the wall to go around the fan. But other than that, it is a nice bed. 4Happy with this bedJoanHappy with this bed5Looks great but could not insert couple screws into the headboardMrinaliniThe headboard is sturdy overall even if I could not screw in a couple of them. But wish ikea could make these better so that the assembly gets easier. I spent a lot of time trying to get the screw to go all the way in, almost stripping it.
Nevertheless, the assembled bed looks great. I only purchased the bed frame since I used my adjustable bed frame instead of the luroy bed slats. 4SturdyJuanI purchased the bed two years ago. I am impressed at how sturdy it is even after relocating once. Of course, the quality is much lesser than that of more expensive brands but it’s a nice bed. I paid less than $500 for the bed in 2022 - huge price increase since then. Also, I paid to have it assembled which was worth it. The better the assembly, the better your product experience.4not sure how to feel about this bedBlairwe waited MONTHS for this bed to be back in stock. once it was, we rushed to the store to grab it. got home and started putting it together and one of the screws got stuck and wouldn’t move. my husband was able to get the screw out, but it was stripped. also found a giant crack in a post. so we went back to ikea to get new screws and they were out (of course).
we decided to buy another bed and return the first and now having the SAME problem with a screw getting stuck and now, the allen wrench broke off in the screw!! this bed might be beautiful, but getting it put together is turning out to be a giant hassle.
i might suggest skipping this one….2I LOVE THIS BED!!!ChristieI have purchased many Ikea items. Some great and some not so great, but overall I like Ikea furniture. I bought a four-poster bed frame for my daughter from an online company and it was the worst bed ever. It was so flimsy and squeaky. It couldn't hold 2 people on it. I decided to look into the Ikea four-poster bed frame and to my surprise it was super sturdy. We cannot believe how strong this bed is. I saw a review that said it wasn't sturdy or well made and they must have put it together wrong because this bed doesn't move. I never write reviews but had to write this one because it's great when you find something that is really worth the money!!! You will not go wrong with this bed!!!5Great farm style beddingKarthik4 star for Higher price tag, but looks very classic and farm style.4BedVincentLove the bed got it for my mom and it brightened up her room5Looks greatTrentLooks great5Customer reviews4.2Average rating43ReviewsSkip listingI love it!5I love how elegant this bed frame is. It's also very durable.
Tip: Choose a reinforced frame and that would be great!Karen, United States of AmericaWe just put this bed5We just put this bed together last night, and it took us about 3.5 hours, but it was worth it! It’s a beautiful bed and very sturdy. Very happy with our purchase.Emily, United States of AmericaGreat Bed5My daughter loves her new bed. Looking for the fun stuff to hang up on top and the sidesDee, United States of AmericaShow all reviewsAccessories for YTTERVÅGGenerated at: 2025-11-19T02:30:41.083ZError reason: LooksByYouErrorFragmentRelated productsSkip listingTÄLLÅSEN Upholstered bed frame, Kulsta gray-green/Luröy, Queen$449.00Price $ 449.00(47)More options2 colorsVITARNA Four-poster bed frame, white, Full/Double$159.00Price $ 159.00(28)TÄLLÅSEN Upholstered bed frame, Kulsta gray-green, Queen$399.00Price $ 399.00(53)BJÖRKSNÄS Bed frame, birch/birch veneer/Luröy, Queen$499.00Price $ 499.00(129)TUFJORD Upholstered bed frame, Tallmyra black-blue, Queen$599.00Price $ 599.00(52)VEVELSTAD Bed frame with 2 headboards, white/Tolkning rattan, Queen$269.00Price $ 269.00(7)Recommended for youIKEA KreativExplore your optionsMix and match bedroom furniture and decor to find the perfect fit for your home.Try it outGet the lookIdeas based on your recently viewed productsSkip listingMore from the Accessories for YTTERVÅGSkip listingMARSTRUP Rug, low pile, beige, 5 ' 3 "x7 ' 7 "$199.99Price $ 199.99Last chance to buy(10)BLIDVÄDER Table lamp, off-white ceramic/beige, 20 "$99.99Price $ 99.99(243)KÄRRDUNÖRT Duvet cover and pillowcase(s), dark green/multicolor, King$79.99Price $ 79.99(952)Cotton/LyocellKÖLAX Bedspread, gray-green, Full/Queen$54.99Price $ 54.99Last chance to buy(26)PolyesterNATTJASMIN Fitted sheet, white, Queen$29.99Price $ 29.99(3051)GRÅVACKA / MOLNART Pendant lamp with LED bulb, beige/gray clear glass, 5 "$26.98Price $ 26.98(7)