HOW TO GET A DAMN JOB 
MAKING THE CREATIVE INDUSTRY YOUR BITCH

At the beginning of my final year in college, I was feeling uninspired,
defeated, and absolutely paralyzed by imposter syndrome. A few months
later, I enrolled in Luke Sullivan's portfolio class and immediately knew
that the trajectory of my life had been altered. 
If you don't know Luke, he basically wrote the book on advertising (no
seriously, it's called Hey Whipple Squeeze This). At SCAD, his reputation
as an "Ad God" preceeded him, but I never could've anticipated the
impact he'd have on my life.
In Luke's class, I learned how to find confidence in my abilities and art
direct like a badass. Most importantly, he taught me everything I know
about how to get a damn job- which I now get to share with you.
This 22 page PDF is dedicated to Luke Sullivan: legend, mentor, old fart.
LEGEND, MENTOR,OLD FART


HOW TO GET ADAMN JOB
PART ONE:
Establish Your Voice
Draft Your One Liner
Create Your Portfolio
Build Your Resume
Compile Recs
PART TWO:
Employment Hitlist
Email Outline
Networking Sheet
LinkedIn Message Template

ESTABLISHYOUR VOICE
Let's start with some brutal truths... the creative job market is over-saturated and
extremely competitive. You know exactly who and what you're up against. It's scary.
 
So what do you do when you're applying for a job with 60 other applicants with equal
qualifications, impressive portfolios, and hefty resumes?

ESTABLISHYOUR VOICE
Throw away your identity as a creative. We're all creatives. Let your portfolio speak for
itself and establish who you are as a human being. 
 
Think about the way your family, friends, professors, shift manager, dog, or grandma
might describe you. Read old texts, journal entries, and informal essays and figure out
how you sound when you're just being you. That's your voice, that's your identity. 
 
It takes courage to find your voice and run with it, which is why so many people don't.
That's why establishing a voice that's undeniably you will differentiate you from an
applicant pool of people who choose to mimic the voice of the industry.

DRAFT YOUR ONE LINER
Use your newly established voice to distill who you are into a single line.
Getting Started:
It's hard to pare down *the essence of
you* into just a single line... but these
exercises can help get you started.
EXERCISE ONE:
Write a personal vision (who you want to
become) and mission (who you currently are).
 
EXERCISE TWO:
List your ten top qualities, traits, or strengths.
Brag about yourself!
 
EXERCISE THREE:
Ask a friend to describe you... get a completely
biased opinion of just how great you are.

DRAFT YOUR ONE LINER
Use your newly established voice to distill who you are into a single line.
One Liner Formula:
If you're having a tough time, try
following this formula.
Your name is a creative title with a strong
background in major/concentration and a
passion for your passion. + a fun fact about your
ideal creative environment.
 
FOR EXAMPLE:
Rachel Gaede is an art director with a strong
background in creative technology and a
passion for creating human-centered branding
experiences. She is most productive when
listening to Fleetwood Mac.

https://www.dope-ass-portfolio.com
This is the first impression page! You want to immediately draw the
viewer in and show them what you're all about. Begin the page with
your one-liner to give viewers an immediate sense of who you are
followed by a gallery of your top six creative endeavors.
Home Page
page 1  of  4
Capitalize on the opportunity to share all of your passions.
CREATE YOUR PORTFOLIO

https://www.dope-ass-portfolio.com
From the home page, viewers will most often navigate to one of your
project pages. Project pages should be streamlined and should
showcase your creative process. Talk openly about your creative
process and how you reached the final product.
Project Page
page 2 of  4
Capitalize on the opportunity to share all of your passions.
CREATE YOUR PORTFOLIO

https://www.dope-ass-portfolio.com
This page should give viewers a comprehensive idea of who you are.
This is your chance to let people know what you believe in, what your
creative journey has been so far, and what your work means to you.
People respond well to passion, so don't hold back (and definitely
don't forget to link your resume and any relevant socials).
About Page
page 3 of  4
Capitalize on the opportunity to share all of your passions.
CREATE YOUR PORTFOLIO

https://www.dope-ass-portfolio.com
Sometimes Titled: Play, Lab, Mom's Fridge, Recycle Bin, Junk Drawer
 
Contrary to popular belief, the "other" page is the most important
page on your site. Fill this section with all things you. Your side gigs.
Your passion projects. Your failed artistic attempts. Invoking this
transparency allows you to connect with viewers on a personal level.
Other Page
page 4 of  4
Capitalize on the opportunity to share all of your passions.
CREATE YOUR PORTFOLIO

 
*While your resume is undeniably important, it
shouldn't tell your potential employer anything they
can't find on your website or LinkedIn.
A professional profile, education,
career history, skills, and expertise.
A KILLER RESUME* HAS...
Give an overview of your creative journey.
BUILD YOUR RESUME

1
3
2
Previous Employers...
can attest to your professional skillset, your ability to perform
in the workplace and your areas of creative expertise.
COMPILE RECS*
The classic "but don't just
take it from me..."
Former Professors...
can discuss your growth as a creative, who you are as a
learner, and how you respond to constructive criticism. 
Literally Anyone...
can vouch for who you are as a human being, what fuels your
creative drive, and the impact of your work.
*it's always good to have a couple rec letters on hand. Don't feel like
you need all three rec letters, pick the one that best fits your needs!

EMPLOYMENTHIT LIST
This is a Luke Sullivan classic. Make a list of 100 potential employers. If that sounds like
a lot of work- it is. But this Hit List will allow you to optimize your application process.
 
For each employer, list the company name, office location, number of employees, a link
to a recruiter's LinkedIn, their top clients, your favorite project(s) by them, and their
website. Feel free to organize your list in a way that makes sense to you.
 
For example: Wunderman Thompson, California, 7,000+ employees,
www.linkedin.com/allisonadams, Shell/Mazda/Snap Inc./Hulu,
www.wundermanthompson.com

Stand out against your competitors by being unapologetically you.
EMAIL OUTLINE
https://www.im-your-best-option.com
The average human has an 8-second attention span. The average
recruiter doesn't have an attention span. They have overflowing
inboxes, calls to schedule, and people to hire. Don't waste their time.
 
Get in. Get out. Quickly establish exactly who you are and exactly
why they won't find anyone else like you.
Establish Yourself

https://www.im-your-best-option.com
Stand out against your competitors by being unapologetically you.
EMAIL OUTLINE
Hi RECRUITER NAME, 
Here's my site: WWW.YOURSITE.COM
Use this space to stand out against your competitors. Tell the recruiter a joke, your worst
nightmare, your biggest pet peeve, something funny your niece said. Make it memorable!
Best,
YOUR NAME
My name is YOUR NAME and I just graduated from YOUR UNIVERSITY as a YOUR
MAJOR/SPECIALTY and would love to work at COMPANY NAME. I think the work you did
for PROJECT NAME and PROJECT NAME is incredible.
Reference your Hit List to fill in the following information:

https://www.im-your-best-option.com
Stand out against your competitors by being unapologetically you.
EMAIL OUTLINE
I’m most creative when I’m listening to Fleetwood Mac (specifically Rumors) 
If I could eliminate one thing from the earth, it’d be ketchup (can’t stress this enough)
Hi John Doe, 
My name is Rachel Gaede and I just graduated from Savannah College of Art and Design as a
creative technologist and would love to work at The Ad Agency. I think the work you did for
Snap Inc. and Hulu is incredible.  
Here’s my site: www.rachelgaede.com
Also, there are a couple of very important things I failed to include on my website. 
Best,
Rachel Gaede

NETWORKING SHEET
Kinda like LinkedIn, but old school, and way more stealthy.
Make Excel Your Bitch
Excel sucks. You know this.
But you're going to make Excel do all
the work so your brain doesn't have
to... and trust me, it's worth it.
THE SET UP:
To set up your networking sheet, keep things
simple. Open Excel or Google Sheets and make
three columns: Name/Position, Company, and
Talking Point (example on next slide).
 
THE USE:
The whole point of this sheet is to make you look
like the business savvy genius you are. This sheet
will help you keep track of who you know and
how you know them. 

NETWORKING SHEET
Kinda like LinkedIn, but old school, and way more stealthy.
NAME & POSITION
Nancy Reyes, CEO
Rachel Gaede, Jr AD
COMPANY
TBWA
Wunderman Thompson
TALKING POINT
3% Conference
SCAD Networking Event
connected
requested
can't connect
Let's use Nancy Reyes as an example. I heard Nancy host a discussion at the 3%
Conference. I added her name, position and company to the sheet. Then I filled out
the most important piece: my talking point. The next time I see or speak with Nancy I
can quickly reference this sheet and say "Hey Nancy! I hope things are going well at
TBWA. I wanted to say how impactful your words at the 3% Conference were."
Showing that you care about and remember what people have to say is one of the
easiest ways to ensure people care about and remember what you have to say.
This color code helps you keep track
of who you've reached out to on
LinkedIn. Green is people you've
connected and spoken with, yellow is
people you've reached out to, and
red is people you aren't yet able to
connect with. 

1
3
2
Pick a Workplace 
Using the LinkedIn search function, find a company where
you'd love to work.
LINKEDIN MESSAGE
TEMPLATE
View Current Employees
From the company page, select "people." Choose an
employee with mutual connections or similar work history.
Select a Template
Connect by sending a message. Write your own, or choose a
template (right) that aligns with your relation to this employee.
LinkedIn is a fantastic way to build your network and make
connections with potential. Put yourself out there. Get that job!
CONNECTING WITH ALUM
I’m considering applying to COMPANY NAME, and I'd love to
discuss your experience working there.
I’ve always wanted to work at COMPANY NAME, and I’d love to
discuss your time working there. 
Working at COMPANY NAME is a dream of mine, and I’d love to
hear about your experience working there.
With graduation approaching, I’m exploring different
employment options and I’d love to hear more about what you do
as a POSITION NAME. 
I’m considering pursuing a career in POSITION NAME and I’d love
to hear more about your career path with COMPANY NAME.
Hi NAME! I'm a senior YOUR MAJOR student at YOUR UNIVERSITY,
and I noticed you're an alum...
(PICK ONE)
CONNECTING WITH RECRUITERS
I noticed you’re a recruiter for COMPANY NAME, and I’d love to
hear more about what you look for in your applicant pool.
I noticed you’re a recruiter for COMPANY NAME, and I was
wondering if you’d have time to discuss what you look for in an
ideal candidate?
I noticed you’re a recruiter for COMPANY NAME, and I’d love to
discuss what makes an employee a good fit for your company.
I noticed you were previously a recruiter for COMPANY NAME
and I was wondering if you’d have time to discuss what you look
for in potential new hires?
Hi NAME! I’m a senior YOUR MAJOR student at YOUR UNIVERSITY...
(PICK ONE)

YOU GOT THIS.
Most importantly, have confidence in yourself and your abilities.
You worked your ass off to be where you are now. Make it known.

I'd be remiss if I didn't at least attempt to tell you about
who I am and what I do as a designer. 
I'll keep it brief. 
I'm an art director by job title, but a creative technologist
by passion. It's my goal to leverage creative data and
evolving technology to create unique and inspiring
immersive brand experiences.
I'd love to hear from you about anything you found helpful
(or unhelpful) about this job guide. My contact info's linked
to my site so hit me up and let me know your thoughts :)
SHAMELESSSELF PROMO