I had been five years since I last returned to Shanghai. The city now unfolds more quietly, with a composed aura…
Read More
Eight noses jut from the façade of the Kestner Gesellschaft in Ian Waelder’s exhibition “thereafter.” In Self-Portrait as My Father’s Nose (2025),…
Read More
The darkened windows appear like black holes. From the outside, nothing can be seen. The façade resembles a dodgy nightclub…
Read More
Latest Issues
UNIVERSALITY NOW AND HOW WE GOT PARTICULAR  Threats to the security, freedom and dignity of life today from global ecological…
Read More
Almost nothing is too much. – Reyner Banham, 19621 It is not uncommon to hear that architecture today has dissolved,…
Read More
They remained oblivious to the worlds within worlds that existed just beyond the edge of their awareness and yet were…
Read More
Michael Abel: First question — how does Volumes begin? Luigi Alberto Cippini: What I tried to do, within my limitations, was to make something…
Read More
If cathode ray blue was the color of the “digital,” and millennial pink that of the “post-digital,” with perhaps a…
Read More
Carlo Antonelli: Who are these people, the ones that populates your works? Kai Althoff: They accumulate. Some return more often…
Read More
On the Greek island of Tinos, centuries-old dovecotes — white stone towers originally used to harvest pigeon droppings as fertilizer…
Read More
Kelsey Isaacs’s shower floor is home to a sculptural tableau that quite literally sets the stage for a practice in…
Read More
One image, slid. Something like cleavage, crumpled, diminishes into the groin. One image, synthesized. She is hard, interstice furling interstice,…
Read More
St. Sebastian is a kinky pussyboy, or a honeytrap. Spank me, Blasphemy! Beamed into a bucolic, peachy saturnalia, his cock-ringed,…
Read More
Moving through Zurich — whether on foot, by bicycle, tram, or car — rarely involves a direct or uninterrupted trajectory.…
Read More
“It did what all ads are supposed to do: create an anxiety relievable by purchase.” – David Foster Wallace, Infinite…
Read More
“You see the eastern critics and historians that assigned Chicago the place of the skeleton frame, thereby, you know, together…
Read More
For a century, architecture has been a crippled art — every building that has been built proves it; formal combinations…
Read More
FALL 352 2025
→
The Straightforward Complexity of Psyche. Paul McCarthy
Square One. A conversation with Kate Spencer Stewart
Half-there
Gala Porras-Kim “Recollection Returns with a Soft Touch” Museum of Civilizations, Rome￼￼
Don’t Be Alive. Aki Goto
Eros is a verb. Coco Klockner ￼
Reality Breaks the Frame. Lenard Giller ￼
Spectral Nomenclature. Anastasia Pavlou