AboutLaunched in Spring 2020, Pioneer Works Broadcast is a virtual and annual print magazine that encourages radical thinking across the arts, sciences, music, and literature. Broadcast reflects the spirit of Pioneer Works and extends beyond the space’s physical walls in Brooklyn through narrative-driven journalism, essays, criticism, ruminations, video, audio, and much more.We believe in cross-pollination, experimentation, impassioned arguments, unexpected angles, and evocative writing. We operate under the principle that de-siloing the disciplines and championing a spectrum of voices contributes to a diverse culture that benefits us all.SubmissionsPioneer Works Broadcast welcomes submissions across the arts, sciences, music, and technology. We’re partial to strong analyses and voice-driven narratives. Please send a concise pitch—300 words max—along with two writing samples—published or unpublished, as links or attachments—to broadcast@pioneerworks.org. In the pitch, please be sure to include: why this, why now, and why us?All contributors will be paid for their work. Please note that while we appreciate every submission, we operate as a small team and may not be able to respond to each of them.Broadcast Founders Janna LevinMichael JonesEditors-in-ChiefJanna LevinJoshua Jelly-SchapiroManaging EditorMichael JonesSenior Arts EditorDavid Everitt HoweSenior EditorLucy McKeonAssistant EditorStella BeltDevelopmentSue RohContributing EditorsLeon Dische BeckerMicaela DurandDesignPioneer Works Design LabAndrew LeClairPublisherPioneer WorksFounder and PresidentDustin YellinExecutive DirectorGabriel FlorenzFounding Director of ScienceJanna LevinAs a 501(c)3 non-profit organization, we rely on the generosity of our supporters to sustain our work. Please consider making a tax-deductible donation to our efforts to build community through the arts and sciences.Pioneer Works Broadcast gratefully acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Program in Public Understanding of Science and Technology.Change the frequency.
Subscribe to BroadcastSubscribeThe Pioneer Works Broadcast is supported byUse High-Contrast Text