CURRENT ISSUE
In Search of Holy Dissidence
Fall 2025
Vol. 43No. Issue
04
Quo Vadis?
The struggle to live in truth today.
Anne Snyder
09
All Things Come to Be Through Strife
The heretical truths of Jan Patočka.
Erin Plunkett
16
A Populism of Solidarity
Journeying to the Rural Revival festival.
Amber Lapp
Explore
Vol. 43No. Issue
04
Quo Vadis?
The struggle to live in truth today.
Anne Snyder
09
All Things Come to Be Through Strife
The heretical truths of Jan Patočka.
Erin Plunkett
16
A Populism of Solidarity
Journeying to the Rural Revival festival.
Amber Lapp
Explore
More from this issue
Essay
Christa Ballard Tooley
A Virtue Divided
Shame, defiance, and the meaning of courage.
Essay
Jessica Hooten Wilson
Live Not by Lies Even When You’re Winning
A call to be obscurely good.
Essay
Gregory Thompson
The Table of Dissent
Julian of Norwich, James Baldwin, and Robert Farrar Capon walk into a bar...
Bookshelf
Comment Editorial Team
Reading for the Remnant
A bookshelf for Christian dissidents.
Photo Essay
Kate Schmidgall
The Sifted
Portraits of steadfast conviction.
Essay
Kevin Brown
The Search for a Durable Identity
Our (continued) need for roots.
Essay
Haejin Shim Fujimura,Makoto Fujimura
Negotiating the Invisible
“Kyoto” and the art of beholding.
New from Comment
Matthew J. Milliner
Evangelicalism: A Love Story
A salacious tell-all of quiet, unflashy faithfulness.
read
Finnegan Schick
A Sacramental Reality
What narratives about the rising number of Catholic converts miss.
read
Jody C. Benson
What Is Freedom For?
On living in the age of acedia.
read
PODCASTS
ConversingConversing with Mark Labberton invites listeners into transformative encounters with leaders and creators shaping our world at the intersection of Christian faith, culture, and public life.ALL EPISODES
November 18, 202559 minViolenceTo exist as a black male in America is to be perceived as a threat, where crimin...Mike McBrideListenNovember 11, 202550 minBlack Church and Culture WarHow would the black church’s public witness guide Christians through today’s...Justin GiboneyListen
Zealots at the GateMuslim political thinker Shadi Hamid and Christian theologian Matthew Kaemingk explore the future of democracy and religion, charting a new paradigm for navigating difference.ALL EPISODES
June 11, 20251hrMuslims and Christians on Natural LawAre there universal moral laws that bind all humanity? Are some things just righ...Micah WatsonAnver EmonListenApril 23, 20251hr 6minWhat Mormonism Reveals About AmericaThe Mormon faith is deeply American in just about every way, and yet Mormons hav...Matthew BowmanListen
The Whole Person RevolutionHow does Christian humanism express itself on the ground? Join Anne Snyder as she learns from leaders who embody Comment’s way of thought and translate theory into practice.ALL EPISODES
July 23, 202450minHealing the Wounds of TraumaThe language of trauma has become a part of our vernacular over the last decade....Steve WestListenJune 18, 202455minForming Peacemakers, Stoking ImaginationWhat are the pathways of formation required to cultivate the kind of wisdom and ...David KatibahSarah SturmListen
MATERIAL MYSTICISM
Matthew J. MillinerEvagrius in FlorenceA city for celebrities, tourists, artists, scholars, thieves—and mystics.Jonathan A. AndersonThe Invisibility of Religion in Contemporary ArtAn interview with Jonathan A. Anderson.Matthew J. MillinerPicturing Aphou, a Lost African MysticDo Christian icons and artificial intelligence mix?Matthew J. MillinerMerton’s NurseHow Mary helped rescue America’s most famous monk.
more
Subscribe now
4 print issues per year + unlimited online access. All for only $24.
Receive our print magazine and get instant digital access to our current issue and our entire archive. Listen to longform essays, bookmark articles, save your reading location, and more.
Subscribe Now
POPULAR ESSAYS
Matthew J. MillinerMerton’s NurseHow Mary helped rescue America’s most famous monk.Richard V. ReevesWhat Men Are ForWhen Lone Ranger masculinity bottoms out.Jeff ReimerHow Not to Be a SchismaticWayfaring through a broken ecclesial landscape.Laura FabryckyMotherhood and the Intellectual LifeWhat kind of knowing is maternal knowing?
more
Join readers who receive fresh, thought-provoking articles once a week right in their inbox.
Sign up for our weekly newsletter. You can unsubscribe at any time. See our privacy policy for more details.
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS
" />Brandon VaidyanathanThe Catholic University of America, Washington, DC" />Daniel Bezalel RichardsenDepartment of Finance Canada, Ottawa, Ontario" />Luke BrethertonChrist Church College, Oxford, United Kingdom
VIEW TEAM
Join readers who receive fresh, thought-provoking articles once a week right in their inbox.
Sign up for our weekly newsletter. You can unsubscribe at any time. See our privacy policy for more details.
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS
" />L.M. SacasasChristian Study Center, Gainesville, Florida" />Christine EmbaThe Atlantic, Washington, DC" />Brad EastAbilene Christian University, Abilene, Texas
VIEW TEAM