Coordinates: 40°43′04″N 74°00′30″W﻿ / ﻿40.71778°N 74.00833°W﻿ / 40.71778; -74.00833
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Telecommunications building in Manhattan, New York
"Western Union Building" redirects here. For the building in South Dakota, see Western Union Building (Aberdeen, South Dakota). For the former telegraph headquarters on Broadway, see Western Union Telegraph Building. For the current building on Broadway, see 195 Broadway.
60 Hudson StreetSeen from One World ObservatoryFormer namesWestern Union BuildingGeneral informationLocation60 Hudson StreetManhattan, New YorkCoordinates40°43′04″N 74°00′30″W﻿ / ﻿40.71778°N 74.00833°W﻿ / 40.71778; -74.00833Construction started1928Completed1930Height371 feet (113 m)Technical detailsFloor count24Design and constructionArchitectRalph Thomas WalkerArchitecture firmVoorhees, Gmelin and WalkerDesignatedOctober 1, 1991Reference no.1749 (exterior)1750 (interior)
References[1]
60 Hudson Street, formerly known as the Western Union Building, is a 24-story telecommunications building in the Tribeca neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City. Built in 1928–1930, it was one of several Art Deco-style buildings designed by Ralph Thomas Walker of Voorhees, Gmelin and Walker for telecommunications in the early 20th century. 60 Hudson Street spans the entire block between Hudson Street, Thomas Street, Worth Street, and West Broadway.
60 Hudson Street is 371 feet (113 m) tall. Its design shows the influence of Dutch and German Expressionism, with Art Deco detailing. The building's shape features asymmetrical massing and numerous setbacks. The brick facade uses a gradient color scheme with nineteen distinct hues, moving from darker shades to lighter ones as the building rises, and several ornate entrances at ground level lead to a barrel-vaulted brick lobby.
60 Hudson Street was initially the headquarters of Western Union, and its construction was commissioned by Western Union president Newcomb Carlton. The building was described as the world's largest telegraph building upon its opening and served as the combined headquarters for all of Western Union's divisions, which were scattered across New York City prior to the building's completion. Though Western Union relocated elsewhere in 1973, its former headquarters remain a communications center, and since the late 20th century, has housed a colocation center, making it one of the most important Internet hubs in the world. The exterior and lobby were designated as official New York City landmarks in 1991.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=60_Hudson_Street&oldid=1317332116"
Categories: Art Deco architecture in ManhattanArt Deco skyscrapersOffice buildings in ManhattanInternet in the United StatesNew York City Designated Landmarks in ManhattanNew York City interior landmarksOffice buildings completed in 1930Skyscrapers in ManhattanTelecommunications buildings in the United StatesTelephone exchange buildingsTribecaWestern Union buildings and structures1930 establishments in New York City1930s architecture in the United StatesRalph Thomas Walker buildingsHidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlasCS1: unfit URLWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataGood articlesUse American English from June 2023All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from June 2023Pages using infobox mapframe without shape links in WikidataCoordinates on WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesCommons category link from WikidataPages using the Kartographer extension