House ToursHome TypeStudio Apartmentshouse callA 235-Square-Foot Brooklyn Studio Hides a GREAT Wall-Mounted Work-From-Home DeskApartment Therapy SubmissionsApartment Therapy Submissionsupdated Dec 9, 2020SaveShareWe independently select these products—if you buy from one of our links, we may earn a commission. All prices were accurate at the time of publishing.See More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneName: Emily ForgioneLocation: Crown Heights — Brooklyn, New YorkType of home: Studio apartmentSize: 235 square feetYears lived in: 1 year, rentingSee More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneTell us a little (or a lot) about your home and the people who live there: I live by myself in this cute and cozy studio in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. I love this vibrant neighborhood and having Prospect Park and lots of friends nearby. I didn’t think I could afford to live alone in this area, and was preparing for my fifth (!) New York City Craigslist roommate hunt, when this affordable studio basically fell into my lap and I had to take it. It was a dream come true to have my own place! Nevertheless, as was the case for many New Yorkers pre-pandemic, my apartment used to be little more than a place to sleep, as I was always at work or out and about in the City. Suddenly having to work and spend all my time here pushed me to do a complete overhaul of my space, to make it as comfortable, bright, spacious, and pleasant to spend time in as possible! See More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneMy landlord installed new white kitchen cabinets and a ceiling fan, and I installed a stick-on tile backsplash to add some color to the kitchen area. I got a bigger, more comfortable couch, and rearranged the entire space and mounted my TV (by myself!) to maximize space. I also added a wall-mounted folding desk and chair, to save me from having to sit on my couch all day to work. And finally, I filled my space with plants, which fills me with joy! I had never been super into plants before, but tending to these living things and watching them grow has been a calming, uplifting hobby in the midst of an anxious, scary time.See More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneWhat is your favorite room and why? I live in a tiny studio, so the whole place! I’d say my desk area is my favorite nook.See More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneDescribe your home’s style in 5 words or less: Colorful, summery, warm, tranquil, botanicalSee More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneWhat’s the last thing you bought (or found!) for your home? A photo print of an Art Deco building in South Beach, Miami for over my desk. I love visiting Miami Beach in the winter, and this photo instantly transports me there, and adds some bright color to my desk area. See More ImagesCredit: Emily ForgioneAny advice for creating a home you love? If you see something that instantly speaks to you and makes you happy, get it. Go with your gut. Add reminders of people and places you love around your home. And when in doubt, add more plants!This submission’s responses and photos were edited for length/size and clarity.Share Your Style: House Tour & House Call Submission FormFiled in:brooklynhome typehouse callsmall spacesstudio