Design and Computation Master
Application period01 April- 15 May for the winter semester 2025/26Entrance requirementsa first professional university degree in a course of study in the fields of arts and design, humanities, education, social sciences, economics, law, natural sciences,engineering, mathematics, computer science, medicinegerman language skills C1 according to CEFRDetailed information on the content and structure of the program can be found on our website:www.design-computation.berlin Or contact our Study Subject Advising:apply_ @design-computation.berlinStudent Secretariat of the TU Berlin:https://www.tu.berlin/go1661/
Standard period of study: 4 semester, 120 creditsDegree: Master of Arts (MA)
Please note that the application process runs exclusively through the TU Berlin and is therefore subject to a different procedure.Master applicants who have completed or will complete their first university degree (usually Bachelor) at a German university and apply with an ECTS certificate submit their application directly to the TU Berlin.Please register first via the online registration. After registering online, send the completed and signed application form together with all required application documents (except for the work samples - see "Portfolio" separately) as a coherent PDF via the upload form to the Master's service department of the TU.The documents to be submitted, which you can find in the checklist, must be received in their entirety by the application deadline.The following documents must be attached to the application:Please download and complete the application form for direct applicantsProof of the first university certificate (incl. translation, if not issued in German or English) consisting of the certificate as well as an overview of subjects/grades with an indication of the credit points (transcript)orA letter of motivation (max. 2 DIN A4 pages) with information on the specific reasons for choosing the course of study, personal suitability for successfully completing the M.A. "Design & Computation" as well as possible goals for further professional development. 	in the case of a Bachelor's degree not yet completed, an ECTS certificate with current ECTS total incl. current average grade issued by the respective responsible office of the university (e.g. examinations office) or download from a university's own online portal 	These must either: be stamped and signed by the official office or contain an indication that they have been produced by mechanical means or contain a verification code.Details see https://www.tu.berlin/en/go2966/if existing, the study and examinations regulations (“Studien- und Prüfungsordnung – StuPO”) as well as the module descriptions of your primary university degree program (in German or English) Identification document: Copy of your identity card or passport (with personal data)Certificate of enrollment or de-registration from the last German university you attended 	Please note: The missing proof does not lead to a rejection of the application, however, no waiting semesters can be credited without proof.Proof of any periods of civilian/military service according to § 7 Abs. 1 Berliner Hochschulzulassungsgesetz (BerlHZG), only if available, incl. translation (if not issued in German or English).german language skills C1 according to CEFRPortfolioWork / work samples (portfolio) can be presented in a variety of media, for example, texts, artistic design portfolio, scientific papers, engineering papers, audio, film, etc. The work / work samples should demonstrate your individual approach, thematic interests and skills in the context of our cross-university, interdisciplinary, research-based master's program Design & Computation.Technical requirements and submission 	File formats: PDF, MP4, M4V, MOV max. 6 files, each max. 2 GB, total max. 10 GBLabelling of the files: 		Name_First_Name_DC_Filename (e.g. Mustermann_Max_DC_Portfolio.pdf)The files are transmitted via https://www.swisstransfer.com/de-ch . 		Upload your files within the application period to the swisstransfer.com website (preferably with a password) and send the resulting links to apply@design-computation.berlin 		If you have set a password, send it to us in a separate e-mail.
Please note that the application process runs exclusively through the TU Berlin and is therefore subject to a different procedure.Master's degree applicants who have completed their first university degree (usually Bachelor's degree) at a foreign university or who are about to complete their Bachelor's degree in the European Higher Education Area and apply with an ECTS certificate submit their application online uni-assist e.V. for a preliminary examination. Please refer to TU website for information. The following documents must be attached to the application:Proof of the first university certificate (incl. translation, if not issued in German or English) consisting of the certificate as well as an overview of subjects/grades with an indication of the credit points (transcript)or 	in the case of a Bachelor's degree not yet completed in the European Higher Education Area, an ECTS certificate with current ECTS total incl. current average grade issued by the respective responsible office of the university (e.g. examinations office) or download from a university's own online portal. 	These must either: be stamped and signed by the official office or contain an indication that they have been produced by mechanical means or contain a verification code. 	Details see https://www.tu.berlin/en/go2966/If existing, the study and examinations regulations (“Studien- und Prüfungsordnung – StuPO”) as well as the module descriptions of your primary university degree program (in German or English) Identification document : copy of your identity card or passport (with personal data)Current certificate of enrollment or exmatriculation/de-registration if you are or were enrolled at a German university after completing your 1st professional degree abroad. 	Please note: The missing proof does not lead to a rejection of the application, however, no waiting semesters can be credited without proof.Proof of any periods of civilian/military service according to § 7 Abs. 1 Berliner Hochschulzulassungsgesetz (BerlHZG), only if available, incl. translation (if not issued in German or English)For graduates from India, PR China, Vietnam, Mongolia and Iran, there are additional country-specific requirements that must be met when applying. Further information can be found on the following page.A letter of motivation (max. 2 DIN A4 pages) with information on the specific reasons for choosing the course of study, personal suitability for successfully completing the M.A. "Design & Computation" as well as possible goals for further professional development.german language skills C1 according to CEFRPortfolioWork / work samples (portfolio) can be presented in a variety of media, for example, texts, artistic design portfolio, scientific papers, engineering papers, audio, film, etc. The work / work samples should demonstrate your individual approach, thematic interests and skills in the context of our cross-university, interdisciplinary, research-based master's program Design & Computation.Technical requirements and submission 	File formats: PDF, MP4, M4V, MOV max. 6 files, each max. 2 GB, total max. 10 GBLabelling of the files: 		Name_First_Name_DC_Filename (e.g. Mustermann_Max_DC_Portfolio.pdf)The files are transmitted via https://www.swisstransfer.com/de-ch . 		Upload your files within the application period to the swisstransfer.com website (preferably with a password) and send the resulting links to apply@design-computation.berlin 		If you have set a password, send it to us in a separate e-mail.
Further information on the application process can be found here.The admission procedure consists of the pre-selection and the entrance examination. The pre-selection is based on the qualification. The invitation to the entrance examination will be sent via e-mail.The selection interviews are scheduled to take place in the period from July to mid-August 2025.