DesignercizeRandom prompt generator for whiteboard design practice.Choose a difficultyReload until you're happyChoose durationHit Play Easy EMedium MHard HReload Challenge  15 : 003 Design:For:To help:- - - • •  - - - • •Out of time!Do you really think
would use that crappy thing? We award you 0 Stars!We really think
would love this thing! We award you 3 stars!
Designer, challenge thyselfStay up to date:Just 15 Minutes a day gives you:Better design thinkingFaster design decisionsMore dates with attractive peopleMastery of the whiteboardDynamite interview skillsHappiness and success in all your endeavorsWorks best with a friend and a whiteboard, but you can designercize on a screen too. Keep challenges short enough to complete over your lunch break. Do one every day for best results.Here's an instruction manual (v: @teachang + @_echoi_), based on the original instruction manual (v: @mollyinglish).Origin storyDesignercize is a digital version of an analog whiteboard exercise originally created by Kate Rutter and Laura Klein to help designers improve whiteboarding, interviewing, and design thinking skills. It's been honed over thousands of practice sessions with Tradecraft designers.ColophonThe designercize app was created by Tradecraft design instructors Zac & Jake, because we <3 you. Bespoke fonts, handcrafted by Jake, are obtainable here.Zac Halbert"All that to say, this is bad."Jake Fleming"Uh, no. Bad. Bad design."Special thanksInspired by TypeCooker. Engineering support by Patrick Burd, writing + comedic support by Megan Kard, and early explorations by Jonathan Kuei. And a special thanks to all the guinea pig beta testers in the Tradecraft design community.- - - • •  - - - • •A thing by:- - - • •  - - - • •Made byMezzotent