e-fluxJournalSubscribeOn the Recurrence of NeoreactionariesYuk HuiMarcantonio Raimondi, The Witches’ Procession, engraved in the 1520s. License: Public domain.
Issue #151February 2025‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌Notes1Yuk Hui, “On the Unhappy Consciousness of Neoreactionaries,” e-flux journal, no. 81 (April 2017) →.2Jean-François Lyotard, “The Wall, the Gulf, and the Sun,” in Political Writings, trans. Bill Readings with Kevin Paul Geiman (UCL Press, 1993), 114.3I elaborate on the usage of this term in my recent book Machine and Sovereignty: For a Planetary Thinking (University of Minnesota Press, 2024).4J. D. Vance, “Trump: Tribune of Poor White People,” interview by Rod Dreher, American Conservative, July 22, 2016 →.5Peter Thiel, “The Straussian Moment,” in Studies in Violence, Mimesis, and Culture: Politics and Apocalypse, ed. Robert Hamerton-Kelly (Michigan State University Press, 2007), 207.6Alexandre Kojève, “Les philosophes ne m’intéressent pas, je cherche des sages” (January 1968), Le Grand Continent, December 25, 2020 →. My translation.7Carl Schmitt, “Großraum gegen Universalismus” (1939), in Positionen und Begriffe im Kampf mit Weimar-Genf-Versailles, 1923–1939 (Duncker and Humblot, 1994), 299.8Moritz Rudolph, Der Weltgeist als Lachs (The world spirit as salmon) (Matthes und Seitz, 2021).9Oswald Spengler, Man and Technics: A Contribution to a Philosophy of Life (Greenwood Press, 1967), 100–1.10Carl Schmitt, “Die Einheit der Welt,” in Staat, Großraum, Nomos (Duncker und Humblot, 2021), 505: “Der Osten insbesondere hat sich der Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels nicht anders bemächtigt, wie er sich der Atombombe und anderer Erzeugnisse der westlichen Intelligenz bemächtigt hat, um die Einheit der Welt im Sinne seiner Planungen zu verwirklichen.” My translation.11Jean-Luc Nancy, “A Different Orientation,” in Derrida, Supplements, trans. Anne O’Byrne (Fordham University Press, 2023), 125–26.12René Girard, Violence and the Sacred, trans. Patrick Gregory (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977), 1. In the book Girard also discusses the relation between pharmakon and pharmākos by referring to Derrida’s “Plato’s Pharmacy.”13Ian Ward, “J. D. Vance’s Scapegoating Theory Is Playing Out in Real Time,” Politico, September 18, 2024 →.14Girard, Violence and the Sacred, 295. Two pages later Girard rushes to claim that “Plato’s pharmakon is like Aristotle’s katharsis.”15Péter Szondi, An Essay on the Tragic, trans. Paul Fleming (Stanford University Press, 2002), 1. See also Yuk Hui, Art and Cosmotechnics (University of Minnesota Press and e-flux, 2021), §2, 9–20.16I carried out a systematic study over three volumes that I consider a trilogy: Recursivity and Contingency (2019), Art and Cosmotechnics (2021), and Machine and Sovereignty (2024).17My book Machine and Sovereignty concludes with an elaboration of this appeal.‌‌‌‌‌© 2025 e-flux and the author‌