T.L. Taylor is Professor of Comparative Media Studies at MIT and affiliate faculty member in Anthropology and Women’s and Gender Studies. She is a qualitative sociologist who has focused on the interrelations between culture and technology in online environments for over thirty years. Her work sits at the intersection of sociology, critical internet and game studies, and science and technology studies.
Her book about game live streaming, Watch Me Play: Twitch and the Rise of Game Live Streaming (Princeton University Press, 2018), was the first of its kind to chronicle the emerging media space of online game broadcasting and won the American Sociological Association’s CITAMS book award. She is the author of Raising the Stakes: E-Sports and the Professionalization of Computer Gaming (MIT Press, 2012) which explored the rise of esports and Play Between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Culture (MIT Press, 2006), an ethnography of the massively multiplayer online game EverQuest. She is also co-author of Ethnography and Virtual Worlds: A Handbook of Method (Princeton, 2012, updated edition 2024) which focuses on conducting ethnographic and qualitative research in online environments.
She is currently at work on a project about play in theme parks, exploring both the emerging socio-technical assemblage of places like Disney, but also how emergent play and community sits within these highly curated environments.
Dr. Taylor is a highly sought after speaker and consultant. Both the White House and the International Olympics Committee have invited her to special summits focused on gaming. Journalists for the New York Times, PBS, the Los Angeles Times, BBC, CBC, and many others often reach out to Dr. Taylor for her expertise.
She co-founded the non-profit AnyKey, served as a member of Twitch’s Safety Advisory Council and Riot’s Scholastic Association of America Board of Advisors, and has been a consulting researcher for Microsoft and many other companies and civic initiatives. She currently sits on the editorial boards of Social Media & Society, Games and Culture, American Journal of Play, and ROMChip.
For more personal posts on having been a first gen/low income student, see “In through the back door” and “FLI welcome dinner remarks“
Contact:
Comparative Media Studies/WritingMassachusetts Institute of Technology77 Massachusetts Avenue, E15-328Cambridge, MA 02139 USA617-324-4148 / tl@tltaylor.com
Full CV
Monday, July 20, 2009
T.L.