GBIF | Global Biodiversity Information Facility
Free and open access to biodiversity data
Occurrences
Species
Datasets
Publishers
Resources
Search
What is GBIF?
Green elfcup (Chlorociboria aeruginascens) observed in New Mexico, USA by Christian Schwarz (CC BY-NC 4.0)
1.900,000,000
Occurrence records
60,000
Datasets
1,700
Publishing institutions
6,000
Peer-reviewed papers using data
What is GBIF?
GBIF—the Global Biodiversity Information Facility—is an international network and data infrastructure funded by the world's governments and aimed at providing anyone, anywhere, open access to data about all types of life on Earth.
► Video
Learn more
News
Event
Data Use Club seminar: 2025 Graduate Researchers Award winners
11 December 2025
15:00 - 16:30 CET
News
GBIF concludes its 32nd Governing Board Meeting
News
One Health in the EU goes FAIR: Launch of VectorNet Data Portal
Winners from Norway and Australia share first place in the 2025 Ebbe Nielsen Challenge
News
Ukraine becomes an Associate Participant
News
Catalogue of Life enhancement supports improved global taxonomic reference for GBIF
News
Nigerian PhD student Kumdet Panshak Solomon wins 2025 Graduate Researchers Award
News
Colombian master's student Esteban Marentes Herrera wins 2025 Graduate Researchers Award
Data use
Senna reticulata (Willd.) H.S.Irwin & Barneby observed in Manaus, Brazil by crax (CC BY-NC 4.0)
Climate change
Peer-reviewed papers using data
Biodiversity loss and climate change interact in many ways, reflecting two sides of the same problem: humanity’s unsustainable relationship with the natural world. Explore the research relying on data from the GBIF network to understand and assess the growing impact that changing temperatures, precipitation and other climate-related phenomena are having on biodiversity.
Featured
See all
Sphagneticola trilobata (L.) Pruski observed in Macao by Jeremy J Busfield (CC BY-NC 4.0)
Invasive alien species
peer-reviewed papers using data
Information is the single most important variable necessary to support research, monitoring and management of alien and invasive species. From identifying and predicting potential invasions to improving management applications, detection strategies, and risk assessments, GBIF plays a pivotal role in fulfilling data needs about these costly and disruptive forces of change.
Featured
See all
Rhinolophus pusillus Temminck, 1834 observed in Shizuoka, Japan by Ryosuke Kuwahara (CC BY-NC 4.0)
Human health
Peer-reviewed papers using data
Knowing where the species that transmit disease-causing pathogens occur is important for recognizing, managing and preventing potential threats to human communities. Data shared through the GBIF network enables scientists and researchers to map the wild host, vector and reservoir species involved in cycles of disease transmission and how their distributions are changing.
Featured
See all
Danaus plexippus subsp. plexippus observed in Querétaro, Mexico by Christine Cieslak Campelo (CC BY-NC 4.0)
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species™
species assessments citing GBIF
GBIF-mediated data is used for mapping species distributions and for calculating Area of Occupancy (AOO) and Extent of Occurrence, measures key to assessing threat level and categorizing species on the Red List.
Latest updates
See all
Thematic communities
GBIF's data, infrastructure and services support cross-disciplinary research, creating new opportunities for evidence-based science and decision-making. With guidance from the GBIF Science Committee, we monitor signals from who's sharing and using data to pursue strategic opportunities with impact, continuously seeking to improve the quality, relevance and utility of biodiversity data for a wide array of communities across science, technology and policy.
Learn more
Programmes and projects
Mediterranean violet aeolid Flabellina affinis (Gmelin, 1791), Observed in Spain. Photo 2021 Adrie Rolloos via iNaturalist Research-grade Observations, licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.
Hosted portals
57
Hosted portals
GBIF hosted portals offer simple, customizable websites that support biodiversity data use and engagement at national, institutional, regional and thematic scales. This service, which Participant nodes and their partners can apply to anytime, lowers the technical demands for delivering relevant biodiversity data to communities around the world.
Learn more
Team consultation at the BID Capacity Enhancement Workshop: Data use for decision-making, Cape Town, South Africa, 11 April 2018. Participants (left to right): Ernest Lamptey, Raymond Owusu-Achiaw, Donald Mpalika, Elizabeth Mwafongo, Jacqueline Sapoama Kumadoh, Hannah Owen. Photo Maheva Bagard Laursen | GBIF, licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
BID: Biodiversity Information for Development
projects
Biodiversity Information for Development (BID) is a multi-year programme funded by the European Union and led by GBIF with the aim of enhancing capacity for effective mobilization and use of biodiversity data in research and policy in the ‘ACP’ nations of sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific.
Learn more
Explore all projects
Group photo by Dina Setyaningrum licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0
BIFA: Biodiversity Information Fund for Asia
projects
BIFA—the Biodiversity Information Fund for Asia—provides supplementary support for existing activities within the GBIF network, addressing the needs of regional researchers and policymakers through mobilization and use of biodiversity data. The programme is the outcome of a contribution from the Ministry of the Environment, Government of Japan, earmarked for activities in Asia.
Learn more
Explore all projects
Bellyache bush (Jatropha gossypiifolia), Amansi East district, Ghana. Photo 2019 Steven Schulting via iNaturalist Research-grade Observations, licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.
Capacity Enhancement Support Programme
projects
This programme aims to address specific capacity needs identified by GBIF Participants by facilitating collaboration at regional and global levels,
providing co-funding for capacity enhancement projects based on combinations of mentoring activities, regional training workshops and documentation.
Learn more
Explore all projects
Malacosoma castrense by Robin Bad via iNaturalist. Photo licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.
Northern Eurasia
projects
Starting in 2018, the Finnish Biodiversity Information Facility (FinBIF), the GBIF national node for Finland, has provided funding directed toward support of projects that mobilize biodiversity data and promote national training and capacity-building activities around data publishing in the region.
Learn more
Explore all projects
Resources and documentation
Beginner's guide to the GBIF API
All you need to know about GRSciColl
Community forum
Join the conversation and get answers to data use related questions
Learn about the technical support hour for nodes