Design Intelligence LabPublicationsLarge Language Objects:  The Design of Physical AI and Generative ExperiencesCoelho, M. and Labrune, JB. Large Language Objects: The Design of Physical AI and Generative Experiences. interactions 31, 4 (July - August 2024), 43–48.Be the Beat: AI-Powered Boombox for Music Suggestion from Freestyle DanceChang, E., Chen, Z. et al. Be the Beat: AI-Powered Boombox for Music Suggestion from Freestyle Dance. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI '25).Large Language Objects et design d’expériences générativesCoelho, M. and Labrune, JB. Large Language Objects et design d’expériences génératives. Revue Azimuts, 2024. Ésadse/Cité du Design. Artificial Intelligence and Additive FabricationCoelho, M. (Guest Editor). Artificial Intelligence and Additive Fabrication. 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing Journal. Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. 2024.Computational SkinsCoelho, M. Computational Skins. Active Matter. MIT Press. 2017.Crowd-Driven Pattern Formation: Computational Strategies for Large-Scale Design and AssemblyCoelho, M. and Grossman, T. Crowd-Driven Pattern Formation: Computational Strategies for Large-Scale Design and Assembly. Architectural Design Journal. Wiley. 2017.Shape-Changing Interfaces‍Coelho, M. and Zigelbaum, J. Shape-Changing Interfaces, in the Journal of Personal and Ubiquitous Computing: Volume 15, Issue 2 (2011), Page 161.Crowdsourced FabricationB Lafreniere et. al. Crowdsourced Fabrication. In UIST’16 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. (UIST’16). (Tokyo, Japan)Cornucopia: The Concept of Digital GastronomyZoran, A. and Coelho, M. Cornucopia: The Concept of Digital Gastronomy, in Leonardo: Journal of the International Society for the Arts, Sciences and Technology. Volume 44, Number 5, October 2011, pp. 425-431.Six-Forty by Four-Eighty: an interactive lighting installationCoelho, M et al. Six-Forty by Four-Eighty: an interactive lighting installation. In CHI '11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '11). (Vancouver, Canada).Six-Forty by Four-EightyCoelho, M., Z, J. and Kopin, J. Six-Forty by Four-Eighty: The Post-Industrial Design of Computational Materials, in the 5th Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Conference (TEI ’11). (Madeira, Portugal).Material ComputingCo-Editor, in collaboration with Dr. Leah Buechley, of Material Computing, a special issue of the Journal of Personal and Ubiquitous Computing. Volume 15, Issue 2.Shutters: A Permeable Surface for Environmental Control and CommunicationCoelho, M. and Maes, P. Shutters: A Permeable Surface for Environmental Control and Communication, in the 3rd Tangible and Embedded Interaction Conference (TEI '09). (Cambridge, UK).Programming Reality: From Transitive Materials to Organic User InterfacesCoelho, M., Poupyrev, I., Sadi, S. and Vertegal, R. Programming Reality: From Transitive Materials to Organic User Interfaces, in the Extended Abstracts of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09). (Boston, USA).Surflex: A Programmable Surface for the Design of Tangible InterfacesCoelho, M., Ishii, H. and Maes, P. Surflex: A Programmable Surface for the Design of Tangible Interfaces, in the Extended Abstracts of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '08). (Florence, Italy).Sprout I/O: A Texturally Rich InterfaceCoelho, M. and Maes, P. Sprout I/O: A Texturally Rich Interface, in the 2nd Tangible and Embedded Interaction Conference (TEI '08). (Bonn, Germany).Responsive Materials in the Design of Adaptive Objects and SpacesCoelho, M. and Maes, P. Responsive Materials in the Design of Adaptive Objects and Spaces, in the Interactive and Adaptive Furniture Workshop. (Aarhus, Denmark).Playful Interactions in the Design of Everyday ThingsCoelho, M. and Maes, P. Playful Interactions in the Design of Everyday Things, in the International Symposium on Electronic Art (ISEA '08). (Singapore).Violent Interfaces: The Jack Bauer Training KitZ, J., Coelho, M. et al. Violent Interfaces: The Jack Bauer Training Kit, in the International Symposium on Electronic Art (ISEA '08). (Singapore).Programming the Material WorldCoelho, M. Programming the Material World: A Proposition for the Application and Design of Transitive Materials, in the 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp '07). (Innsbruck, Austria).Pulp-Based Computing: A Framework for Building Computers Out of PaperCoelho, M., Hall, L., Berzowska, J. and Maes, P. Pulp-Based Computing: A Framework for Building Computers Out of Paper, in the 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp '07). (Innsbruck, Austria).Skorpions: Kinetic Electronic GarmentsBerzowska, J., Mainstone, D., Bromley, M., Coelho, M. et al. Skorpions: Kinetic Electronic Garments, in the 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp '07). (Innsbruck, Austria).Transitive Materials: Towards an Integrated Approach to Material TechnologyCoelho, M., Sadi, S., Maes, P., Oxman, N. and Berzowska, J. Transitive Materials: Towards an Integrated Approach to Material Technology, in the 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp '07). (Innsbruck, Austria, 2007).Programming the Material WorldCoelho, M. and Maes, P. Programming the Material World, in the 9th US National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM '07). (San Francisco, USA).SMOKS: The Memory SuitsBerzowska, J. and Coelho, M. SMOKS: The Memory Suits, Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06). (Montreal, Canada).Memory-Rich ClothingBerzowska, J. and Coelho, M. Memory-Rich Clothing, Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06). (Montreal, Canada).Kukkia and Vilkas: Kinetic Electronic GarmentsBerzowska, J. and Coelho, M. Kukkia and Vilkas: Kinetic Electronic Garments, in the 9th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC '05). (Osaka, Japan).DinnerWare: Why Playing With Food Should Be EncouragedCoelho, M. DinnerWare: Why Playing With Food Should Be Encouraged, in the 32nd International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH '05). (Los Angeles, USA).A New Approach for the Production of Educational ContentDaviault, C. and Coelho, M. Forum: A New Approach for the Production of Educational Content, in the 30th International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH '03). (San Diego, USA).© Design Intelligence Lab. All Rights Reserved.Accessibility