Welcome to Movebank's data repository!Through this repository, Movebank allows users to publish animal tracking datasets that have been uploaded to Movebank (www.movebank.org). Published datasets have gone through a submission and review process, and are typically associated with a written study published in an academic journal. All animal tracking data in this repository are available to the public.We invite you to read more about the repository and browse the datasets.
SearchCollections MoveApps Workflows
Data packages
Recent Publications No Thumbnail Available Data packageData from: Study "GPS tracking of honey buzzards in Finland" (2025-10-17) Byholm, Patrik; Mirski, Paweł; Vansteelant, WouterShow moreNatal dispersal is a multistep process. It commences when a juvenile departs from its natal site and concludes when it settles to breed for the first time. During this interim period, dispersing individuals of long-lived species often undergo a wandering phase, which may span years. This phase remains one of the least studied aspects of avian life histories. We utilized a unique GPS-telemetry data set on a slow
reproducing, long-lived migratory bird of prey, the European honey buzzard, Pernis apivorus, tracked for up to 6 years after fledging. Our aim was to assess how phenology, ranging behaviour and philopatry change as individuals gain experience. Individuals exhibited variability in the age at which they first returned to their breeding range, yet all survivors settled at sites proximate to their natal nests. In subsequent returns, immatures increased the time spent within the breeding range and narrowed down their ranging to smaller areas situated progressively closer to their natal nests. Our study reveals the complexity and extended nature of natal dispersal, emphasizing the importance of individual experi ence and migratory improvement for successful recruitment in long-lived species.Show more No Thumbnail Available Data packageData from: Abundance, diet and foraging of Galápagos Barn Owls (Tyto furcata punctatissima) (2025-09-17) Wagner, Hermann; Cruz, Sebastian; Jiménez-Uzcategui, Gustavo; Albán, Katherine; Quezada, Galo; Piedrahita, PaoloShow moreWe studied Galápagos barn owls on Santa Cruz Island in the Galápagos Archipelago. We collected and analyzed pellets to determine diet composition. Barn-owl diet consisted—in terms of biomass—of ~89% rodents and ~10% insects. Bird remains occurred in 1% of the pellets. Foraging was studied with data loggers, a method not previously applied to the study of Galápagos barn owls. Owls rested during the day in natural and human-built roosts such as lava holes, trees, or huts. Night-time foraging was characterized by periods during which the bird moved and periods during which the bird stayed within one place, with the latter amounting to ~56% of the time away from the day roost. Birds began foraging shortly after sunset and returned to their day roost before sunrise. The duration of foraging was approximately 11 h per night. Foraging areas were small (median value: 0.28 km2). Although our data demonstrate a continued presence of the subspecies, we regard the situation for this subspecies as labile, as multiple threats, such as road kills, poisoning, and intentional killing by farmers, have increased recently, and suggest the development of a management plan to improve its conservation.Show more No Thumbnail Available Data packageData from: Study "Migration routes of the Common Kestrel passing through Guiyang, China" (2025-09-10) Li, Chao; Liu, Qiang; Lei, YuShow moreThis dataset documents movements of a male Common Kestrel (Falco tinnunculus) fitted with a satellite tracker in Guiyang, China, between April 2019 and May 2020. Movements include northward spring migration in 2019 from Guiyang to Shanxi Province,
southward autumn migration to Thailand in 2019, and northward migration in 2020. Four major stopover sites were identified in Guizhou, Laos, and Vietnam. Habitat use varied across migration stages, with stopovers occurring most commonly in forested areas (forest (57.63%), cropland (29.94%), grassland (10.73%), shrubland (1.14%), and wetlands (0.56%)), breeding area primarily in grasslands (grassland (70.76%), cropland (25.68%), forest (2.37%), and artificial surfaces (1.19%), and wintering area dominated by cropland (cropland (98.53%), artificial surfaces (1.46%), forest (0.01%). This is the first study to reveal the year-round movements and migration route for kestrels in central and western China, providing baseline data for future studies.Show more No Thumbnail Available Data packageData from: Study "Foraging movement patterns of lactating Mexican long-nosed bats in central Mexico" (2025-09-09) Soriano-Varela, Paulina; Ibarra-Macías, Ana; Rojas-Martínez, Alberto E.Show moreThe Mexican long-nosed bat (Leptonycteris nivalis) is a nectar-feeding bat distributed seasonally between Mexico and the United States, and it has been declared an endangered species in both countries. Here, we describe for the first time the movement patterns and locations of foraging areas used by lactating females from the only known maternity roost in central Mexico. GPS loggers were placed on 29 lactating females, adhered to the interscapular area with short-term surgical glue. We obtained movement tracks of at least one night for 21 different individuals. Movement patterns were identified using the first passage time segmentation method and classified into commutative and foraging flights. Bats made up to three trips on the same night, visiting between one and three foraging areas. On average, the total distance traveled was 61.72 km per night (minimum 23.11 km, maximum 160.55 km), and 37 foraging areas were identified, located between 13 and 40 km north of the roost, mainly in desert shrublands, followed by agricultural areas and temperate forests. In these places, they spent most of their time outside the roost (2.16 h mean ± 1.14 h SD), feeding on the resources available in an average area of 0.38 km2. Bats traveled long distances each night, using areas with abundant wild and human-cultivated floral resources, reflecting the importance of integrating movement ecology for the design of conservation and habitat management strategies that ensure the availability of necessary resources for this species.Show moreLoading...Data packageData from: Study "Locations of second-year rufa Red Knots in Florida, 2024" (2025-09-02) Powell, Abby N.; Kalasz, KevinShow moreThis study investigated the movements, distribution, and overwinter survival of juvenile Red Knots (Calidris canutus rufa) in the southeastern United States to address knowledge gaps in recovery planning, as this subspecies is listed as federally threatened under the U. S. Endangered Species Act. We monitored movements of juvenile knots captured in Florida in 2024 through satellite tracking, and combined these results with additional tracking and resighting data. Together, results highlight the year-round importance of Tampa Bay and surrounding habitats, with many juveniles remaining in Florida through the summer and at least 20% of all study birds surviving to return as adults. Movements extended to other Gulf Coast and southeastern sites, with limited connectivity to Delaware Bay, suggesting distinct migratory strategies. Findings underscore the importance of southeastern U.S. refuges, particularly low-disturbance areas, to juvenile survival and population recruitment, and provide management recommendations to strengthen conservation actions for this subspecies.Show more Load more ...