e-fluxArchitectureSubscribeEating the Future: The Metabolic Logic of AI SlopKate CrawfordAn AI-generated image of a downed F-35 published on social media by Iranian Tasnim News Agency on June 14, 2025. Source: X.com IntensificationSeptember 2025‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌Notes1Matthew Gault and Emanuel Maiberg, “The AI Slop Fight Between Iran and Israel”, 404 Media, June 18, 2025, ➝.2Ali Khamenei (@khamenei_ir), “"Help from Allah and an imminent conquest" (Holy Quran: 61:13),” X, June 16, 2025, ➝.3Dana Nickel, “AI Slop spreads in Israel-Iran War”, Politico, June 23, 2025, ➝.4Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994).5The traditional Krebs cycle occurs in most forms of life that use oxygen to generate energy, whereby the body breaks down nutrients like glucose in a series of chemical reactions. During this process, carbon dioxide is released as waste and energy is captured in molecules that cells use to power their activities.6Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011); Harun Farocki, Eye/Machine I–III, 2001–03. Video installation trilogy.7See Kate Crawford in conversation with Paola Antonelli, “Metabolic Images,” Aperture, Winter 2024, ➝.8Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1, trans. Paul Reitter (London: Penguin Classics, 2019).9John Bellamy Foster, Marx’s Ecology: Materialism and Nature (New York: Monthly Review Press, 2000).10Jason W. Moore, “Environmental Crises and the Metabolic Rift in World-Historical Perspective,” Organization & Environment 13, no. 2 (June 2000): 123–57.11Sina Alemohammad, et al., “Self-Consuming Generative Models Go Mad,” arXiv preprint, 2023, ➝; Ilia Shumailov et al., “AI Models Collapse When Trained on Recursively Generated Data,” Nature 631 (2024): 755–759.12Todd Spangler, “Why Apple’s iPad Ad Fell Flat: Company Failed to Understand It Conjured Fears of ‘Tech Kind of Destroying Humanity’,” Variety, May 16, 2024, ➝.13Pablo Villalobos et. al. “Will We Run Out of Data? Limits of LLM Scaling Based on Human-Generated Data,” arXiv preprint, 2024, ➝.14Kyle Wiggers, “Elon Musk Agrees That We’ve Exhausted AI Training Data,” TechCrunch, Jan 8, 2025, ➝.15Jordan Meyer et. al, “Public Domain 12M: A Highly Aesthetic Image-Text Dataset with Novel Governance Mechanisms,” arXiv preprint, 2024 ➝.16“AI Is Set to Drive Surging Electricity Demand from Data Centres While Offering the Potential to Transform How the Energy Sector Works,” International Energy Agency, April 10, 2025, ➝.17Ian King, “AI Computing Is on Pace to Consume More Energy Than India, Arm Says,” Bloomberg, April 17, 2024, ➝.18Bracey Harris et al, “Up against Musk’s Colossus supercomputer, a Memphis neighborhood fights for clean air,” NBC News, May 15, 2025, ➝.19See Stargate Project announcement: “Trump announces 'Stargate' AI infrastructure project with 'colossal data centers',” posted January 21, 2025, by NBC News, YouTube, ➝; James Walker, “Opening the Stargate: Tech Giants to Invest $500B in AI Data Center Infrastructure,” Data Center Knowledge, January 22, 2025, ➝.20See more at this report: Tatiana Carayannis, Naima Kane, Marie-Therese Png, and Alondra Nelson, Summary Report: Workshop on the Geopolitics of Critical Minerals and the AI Supply Chain, (Science, Technology, and Social Values Lab, Institute for Advanced Study, 2025), ➝.21Matt Klein, “The Problematic Fakery Of Lil Miquela Explained—An Exploration Of Virtual Influencers and Realness,” Forbes, November 17, 2020, ➝.22Dexter Thomas, “Inside the Economy of AI Spammers Getting Rich By Exploiting Disasters and Misery,” 404 Media, January 22, 2025, ➝.‌‌‌‌‌© 2025 e-flux and the author‌