Menu
About
Manifest.AR at the Institute for Contemporary Art, 2011 Boston Cyberarts Festival
Boston Cyberarts, Inc. is a non-profit arts organization created to foster, develop and present a wide spectrum of media arts including electronic and digital experimental arts programming. We exhibit and promote the media and digital arts of Boston, New England and the world to audiences in the New England region and beyond and by doing so, help to promote a sense of media and digital literacy, locally and regionally.Boston Cyberarts was founded to organize the Boston Cyberarts Festival, a biennial festival of artists and high-technology professionals from New England and throughout the world. The Festival included exhibitions of visual arts: music, dance, and theatrical performances; film and video presentations; educational programs; and lecture/demonstrations and symposia. Event take place at locations in and around Boston, including theatres, museums, galleries, artists’ studios, educational institutions, and other public spaces. The Festival first took place during the first two weeks in May 1999. The last festival was held in Spring 2011.Presently Boston Cyberarts organizes the Boston Cyberarts Gallery that supports and encourages experimentation in the arts through exhibitions, events, educational programs and collaboration with like-minded groups in an effort to foster the development of new practices in contemporary art making. Located in the Green Street station on the MBTA’s Orange line in Jamaica Plain, the Boston Cyberarts Gallery is the only art gallery located in a train station in the country, and also the only independent art organization in Massachusetts focusing on new and experimental media. With an interest in technology based, innovative combinations of sculpture, installation and live performance, the Boston Cyberarts Gallery brings together members of the new media community as well as outreaching to the general public, supporting emerging and established artists alike.The Gallery collaborates with another organization; Art Technology New England (ATNE), which hold salons and other educational events here.  ATNE, a project of Boston Cyberarts, is a member-run organization whose purpose is to foster existing and new collaborations in the New England art and technology communities, including non-profit, academic and corporate entities, as well as individuals.Our public art projects include the Art on The Marquee project and the Harbor Islands Pavilion project. Boston Cyberarts and the Massachusetts Convention Center Authority teamed up to create “Art on the Marquee,” an ongoing project to commission public media art for display on the new 80-foot-tall multi-screen LED marquee outside the Boston Convention & Exhibition Center in South Boston. The largest urban screen in New England, this unique digital canvas is one of the first of its kind in the U.S. to integrate art alongside commercial and informational content as part of the MCCA’s longstanding neighborhood art program.
PRESS ARCHIVE
Founder and director (1999 - 2022)George FifieldGallery directorValerie Guinn PolgarTHE BOSTON CYBERARTS BOARD OF DIRECTORSKevin Cavanaugh, ChairMark FavermannFavermann DesignMaura Fitzgerald, ClerkPartner, Version 2.0 CommunicationsGeorgie FriedmanLina Maria GiraldoMichael LewyJeffrey Warmouth