ReliquaryPakistan (ancient region of Gandhara)ca. 2nd–3rd centuryNot on view Artwork DetailsObject InformationOverviewProvenanceTitle: ReliquaryDate: ca. 2nd–3rd centuryCulture: Pakistan (ancient region of Gandhara)Medium: SchistDimensions: (a): Reliquary: H. 1 1/4 in. (3.2 cm); Diam. 1 5/16 in. (4.9 cm)b): Lid:
H. 1 1/16 in. (2.7 cm); Diam. 1 15/16 in. (4.9 cm)Classification: SculptureCredit Line: Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Alvin N. Haas, 1987Object Number: 1987.412.1a, bCuratorial Department: Asian ArtMore ArtworkMore ArtworkRelatedIn the same mediumFrom the same time and placeA slider containing 5 items.Press the down key to skip to the last item.Reliquary with Contentsca. 2nd–3rd centuryBuddha3rd centuryStanding Bodhisattva Maitreya (Buddha of the Future)ca. 3rd centuryBust of a Bodhisattvaca. 4th–5th centurySeated Buddha1st to mid-2nd centuryResearch ResourcesThe Met provides unparalleled resources for research and welcomes an international community of students and scholars. The Met's Open Access API is where creators and researchers can connect to the The Met collection. Open Access data and public domain images are available for unrestricted commercial and noncommercial use without permission or fee.To request images under copyright and other restrictions, please use this Image Request form.FeedbackWe continue to research and examine historical and cultural context for objects in The Met collection. If you have comments or questions about this object record, please contact us using the form below. The Museum looks forward to receiving your comments.Send feedback