Double Title Page from a `Aja'ib al-Makhluqat wa Ghara'ib al-Mawjudat (The Wonders of Creation and the Oddities of Existence)Author Zakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya Qazwini1414–35Not on view The Marvels of Creation contained information on various aspects of the heavens, the earth and its minerals, plants, birds and animals, as well as unusual phenomena and imaginary creatures. A rukh (roc) or 'anqa (fabulous bird) attacking an elephant and a karkadann (rhinoceros) can be seen to the right of each medallion, while on the left are depicted two tigers, a dragon and a phoenix, a ch'i-lin and another fabulous creature.Artwork DetailsObject InformationOverviewSignatures, Inscriptions, and MarkingsProvenanceExhibition HistoryReferencesTitle: Double Title Page from a `Aja'ib al-Makhluqat wa Ghara'ib al-Mawjudat (The Wonders of Creation and the Oddities of Existence)Author: Zakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya Qazwini (ca. 1203–83)Date: 1414–35Geography: Attributed to Iran, ShirazMedium: Ink, opaque watercolor, and gold on paperDimensions: H. 11 3/4 in. (29.8 cm)W. 8 7/8 in. (22.5 cm)Classification: CodicesCredit Line: Fletcher Fund, 1934Object Number: 34.109Curatorial Department: Islamic ArtMore ArtworkMore ArtworkRelatedBy Zakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya QazwiniIn the same mediumA slider containing 5 items.Press the down key to skip to the last item."The Tortoise", Folio from an `Aja'ib al-Makhluqat (Wonders of Creation) of QazwiniZakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya Qazwini (ca. 1203–83)second half 16th centuryFolio from a `Aja'ib al-Makhluqat wa Ghara'ib al-Mawjudat (The Wonders of Creation and the Oddities of Existence)Zakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya Qazwini (ca. 1203–83)17th century`Aja'ib al-Makhluqat wa Ghara'ib al-Mawjudat (The Wonders of Creation and the Oddities of Existence)Zakaria bin Muhammad bin Mahmud Abu Yahya Qazwini (ca. 1203–83)Copied 1701"Rustam Pleads for Tus Before Kai Khusrau," Folio from a Shahnama (Book of Kings)Abu&#39;l Qasim Firdausi (Iranian, Paj ca. 940/41–1020 Tus)dated 741 AH/1341 CE"The Four Knights of Kai Khusrau in the Mountains", Folio from a Shahnama (Book of Kings)Abu&#39;l Qasim Firdausi (Iranian, Paj ca. 940/41–1020 Tus)dated 741 AH/1341 CERelated ContentPublicationsBooks, guides, and catalogues published by The Met.The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Vol. 11, The Islamic WorldFree to downloadResearch ResourcesThe Met provides unparalleled resources for research and welcomes an international community of students and scholars. The Met's Open Access API is where creators and researchers can connect to the The Met collection. Open Access data and public domain images are available for unrestricted commercial and noncommercial use without permission or fee.To request images under copyright and other restrictions, please use this Image Request form.FeedbackWe continue to research and examine historical and cultural context for objects in The Met collection. If you have comments or questions about this object record, please contact us using the form below. The Museum looks forward to receiving your comments.Send feedback